 
 PREFACE 
IT seems to me there are two ways, generally speaking, to pre- 
pare a book, take a trip, or, for that matter, to live a life. One 
may go at it dilettante fashi on, as a tourist—nibbling at ex- 
perience, titillating the emotions yet emotionally starved, 
stimulating oneself with ambition yet forever tortured by 
frustration. Circumstances and temperament, however, may 
conspire together so that, with the freedom of a nomad, one 
can escape the straightjacket of everyday boredom, hurdle 
fences of space and time, and consume life at its sources. Prop- 
erly directed, such an earthly life may give wing to one's 
imagination, clarity to one's thinking, strength to one's convic- 
tions, and even bring one nearer to the simple, eternal truths of 
God and spirit. 
This book, I feel, belongs in the second category—the cate- 
gory of the primitive. 
I left my country quite as uninformed, I am afraid, as are 
most Americans with respect to other peoples and other shores. 
But everywhere I went I sought to touch reality—always 
honestly, and always at first hand. Everywhere I clung close to 
the smells, the flora and fauna of native existence. In that 
spirit I have written of the Arabs among whom I lived. I found 
much good and much evil—evil acquired through a feudal 
order that, in my opinion, remains the Arab's greatest enemy 
and his greatest barrier to emergence from the dark ages. I am 
grateful for Arab hospitality and the kindness I was shown, but 
a reporter, like a physician, must not remain blind to the ills 
plaguing his subject. 
With no desire to attribute to myself or my writings any viii Preface 
exaggerated importance, it is my fervent hope that the many 
Armenians living in the Arab Middle East will not suffer at 
the hands of fanatics because an American of Armenian descent 
happened to write this book. To them I can only say that I 
have told the story honestly, as I saw it. And to my Arab 
friends who asked only that I "tell the truth," I can say in all 
conscience that I have told the truth. Let me assure them that 
I speak in this book as an Americ an, and purely in an individual 
capacity, with no tics to or membership in any Armenian- 
American body save the church into which I was born. Any 
retribution against the Armenians—a minority island in a 
Moslem sea—would be an unwarranted and senseless cruelty. 
I have written this book with the hope that it will bring both 
Arabs and Jews into truer focus for the reader; that it will help 
reveal what they are and what they are not, what may be ex- 
pected of them and what is impo ssible. I pray that these ancient 
Semitic peoples will reconcile their differences, that Palestine 
refugees who, in the main, left their homes because Arab 
leaders urged thern to do so—expecting a short war and a quick 
victory—will be resettled. The only alternative to peace is 
disaster for Arab, Jew, and Christian, for none may hope to 
prosper alone. Together they may ultimately build a prosperous 
and democratic Middle East. To remain apart, at dagger's 
point, means only that Communism and anarchy can be the 
ultimate victors. 
This book could not have been written without the faith 
and love of friends. It would ne ver have seen the light of day 
without the help of those who stood by steadfastly through the 
four stonny years of its preparation and writing, 1947-51. To 
Harold Strauss, my editor, and Paul Reynolds, my literary 
agent, I am grateful for their continuous faith and patience 
since they took me on four years ago. To the Reverend L. M. 
Birkhead I am equally thankful  for his continued understand- 
ing and kindness. To Gerold Fr ank, who helped enormously 
in the editing and in clearing up a vast amount of the under- 
brush of writing, I especially owe a lasting debt of gratitude. Preface ix 
After my book was completed, I asked a Syrian Christian 
(who must remain anonymous be cause of possible retaliation 
against his relatives abroad) and the Reverend and Mrs. Karl 
M. Baehr to read the manuscript critically. My thanks also go 
to these Christian and Arab frie nds for their suggestions. How- 
ever, it must be pointed out that the responsibility for this 
book—text and illustrations—is entirely mine. 
April 9,1951 
JOHN ROY CARLSON  CONTENTS 
Prologue: The Tree Bears Fruit 3 
BOOK I 
i:    London: The Odyssey Begins 17 
ii:    Cairo: The King's jungle 42 
iii:    Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 60 
iv:    The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 78 
v:    Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 93 
vi:    World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 109 
VII :    The Marxist Underground 126 
viii:    Off for the Holy War! 138 
ix:    The Holy City 163 
x:    Gun-Running! 183 
xi:    Return to Jerusalem 202 
XII:    With the Arabs in Jerusalem 221 
BOOK II 
xiii:    Medinat Yisrael Is Born 245 
xiv:    Life in the Besieged City 260 
xv:    A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 279 
xvi:    "Escape" to the Arabs 294 xii Contents 
xvii:   Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 307 
XVIII :    The Last Exodus 323 
xix:   Bethlehem and Jericho 342 
xx:    Philadelphia Is in Jordan 362 
xxi:    Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 379 
xxii:    Das Arabische Biiro: Der Grossmufti 401 
xxiii:    Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 424 
xxiv:    Israel, and Going Home 449 
Appendix: Arab-American Liaison Network 471 
Index                                                 follows page 474 LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS 
(immediately following this list) 
All Photographs by John Roy Carlson 
Followers of Truth being briefed for the Holy War (1.) 
AHMED HUSSEIN and SHEIKH MAHMOUD ABOU EL 
AZAAYIM  (2.) 
Followers of Truth leave tor the Holy War (3.4.) 
SHEIKH HASSAN EL BANNA (5.) 
FAWZY BEY EL KAWOUKJY (6.) 
MAHMOUD NABAOUI ( 7.) 
ABD EL KRIM ( 8.) 
Behind the native curtain in Egypt: Ismailia (9. 10. 11.) 
Street scenes in Gaza (12. 13. 14. 15.) 
In the Old City of Jerusalem: CAPTAIN FADHIL RASHID BEY (16.) 
SHEIKH ISMAIL EL ANSARY (17.) Jewish Quarter burning 
(18.) 
The funeral of an Arab chief (19. 20. 21. 22.) 
In the besieged New City: The Pantiles (23.) Iladassah clinic 
(24.) Funeral of two Americans (25.) 
PATRIARCH GUREGH II  ISRAELIAN (26.) 
With the Armenians (27. 28.) 
Looting of the Old City Jewish quarter (29. 30. 31.) xiv Illustrations 
Surrender of the Old City Jews: RABBI BEN ZION HAZZAN IREQ  
(32.) Haganah prisoners (33.) Ruins of Hurvath Syna- 
gogue (34.) 
Amman (35. 36.) 
KING ABDULLAH and priests (37.) 
HAJ AMIN EL HUSSEINI, the Mufti (38.) 
MAROUF DAWALIBI (39.) 
SALAH FATTAH EL IMAM (40.) 
CAPTAIN HERBERT VON FURST (41.) 
MOUSTAFA EL ARISS {42.) 
PIERRE GEMAYEL (43.) 
Smoking the josic (44.) 
Israel: The port oi Haifa (45.) Childlren at Kibbutz Afikim 
(46.) 
My birthplace in Alexandropolis (47. 48.) 
MAPS 
(by Rafael Palacios) 
The Middle East from CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  PAGE    16 
Jerusalem and Its Environs PAGE 244 (PROLOGUE) 
THE TREE BEARS FRUIT 
Our roots, transplanted from Europe, bear fruit here. 
On free American soil toe have the opportunity to 
achieve all the great dreams, all the great resolves, 
all the promises of human dignity which are so of- 
ten stifled and destroyed in the Old World. 
ONE night in the spring of th e year, when seed in the earth 
breaks sharp through the crust, I left my bed quietly, locked 
the door, and walked into the night. The rain—a full-bodied, 
lusty rain, driven by a furious  wind—beat hard against the 
pavement, formed into rivulets, and flowed down slopes into 
the gutter. It slashed at the tops of trees and beat down the 
saplings and young shoots till they seemed to become one 
with the earth. 
It was past midnight as I walk ed, drenched, in old clothes 
and old shoes. Sleep? I was beyond sleep. For days now some- 
thing had been boiling and churning within me, seeking to 
come through. Solitude wouldn't bring it out, nor long walks 
in the country. Meditation in the back pew of a church didn't 
help. It was in the nature of th ings that the inner storm would 
subside only in the atmosphere of a storm outside. There was 
no other way of quieting me down. 
I had no idea where I was going. I remember only that my 
head was bent to break the fury  of the rain against my face. 
I kept staring at my feet, watching first one then the other 
shoe splash into a puddle and pull out, dripping, and ever be- 4 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
fore me the dark pavement, sleek and glistening with the 
spring rain. It was a warm rain, a lush, fertile rain, holding 
within it the magic to germinat e whatever wanted to sprout. 
Taxis passed, splashing New York's mud and water on me. 
I walked for a long, long time. Eventually my feet led me to 
the doek area of New York's West Side. 
I stopped under a trestle and leaned against one of the sup- 
ports. Then I shook my head and body like a poodle in from 
the rain. Up the road was an all-night diner. I dug my hands 
back into my pockets, bent my head, and began to cross to the 
other side. A car skidded to a stop in front of me. There was 
no splash, no sounding of the horn, no swearing from an irate 
driver. I halted when someone flashed on a light. 
"Police," I thought to myself, and stood there, the glare 
full on my face. I was blinded, and I knew I must have looked 
silly, with water running down me on all sides, down my 
neck, under my shirt, into my socks. It's the most carefree 
feeling in the world if the rain is warm. 
The man behind the wheel rolled down the car window to 
see me better. I stared into the flashlight and I think I smiled 
a bit. "Take a good look," I thought. "I haven't done any- 
thing—yet!" After a moment th e flash went out, the window 
was rolled up, and the car vanished. I crossed to the diner, 
shook myself at the door, entered, and sat on a stool. 
"Coffee!" I said. 
"Nice night for ducks," the man behind the counter said. 
He was tall and gaunt, in his early forties: his long-jawed face 
was broken into a thousand premature wrinkles. They were 
especially thick around his deep-set eyes. 
"Coffee!" I repeated. 
I caught my hair in a scalp-lock and squeezed it like a mop 
to keep the rainwater from dripping into my coffee. Then I 
squeezed my collar and cuffs because rivulets of water were 
flooding the counter. The counterman looked on. The coffee 
felt good to my throat, like a hot egg-nog spiked with old rum. 
But it was making mc too drowsy, so I put down a coin. The Tree Bears Fruit 5 
"Thanks," the man said. 
I felt the pelting of the rain grow stronger as I approached 
the docks and came nearer the waters of the Hudson. The 
Jersey shore was invisible. I could see scarcely fifty feet ahead 
of me. There was no sound except the fury of the rain beating 
down on the ships and tugboats tied to the piers, striking their 
metal sides in a soft, purring staccato. 
The rain seemed to bring out the myriad odors of the water- 
front, stirring up what had been pulverized under the wheels 
of trucks and stevedores' boots. As I walked, there was the 
fetid smell first of oil, then of tar, and then the pungent odor 
of camphor. I moved along the dark, silent, wharves—resting 
now against a hawser post, now against the walls of a battered 
building, or leaning against the soft yet unyielding piles of 
merchandise covered with grease-soaked tarpaulins. I stared 
fixedly at the deep, dark waters, at what lay beyond them. As 
I walked, hunched over, I strained my eyes to look into the 
impenetrable darkness, for no reason I could give. Indeed, I 
had no reason for coming to this lonely spot, save that my feet 
had led me here. 
A ferry whistle came deep from the depths of the mist, as 
if from a ghost ship: a long, haunting, lonesome wail that was 
like the bleating of a lamb lost deep in a forest. It made the 
night lonelier. I stood by, listeni ng and watching for the ferry. 
Finally it emerged, looming out of the dark, its lights like 
misty globules, growing larger and more massive as it eased 
into its berth. There was a grind of rising gates, and then half 
a dozen figures emerged, shapeless as in a dream, and after 
them, truck after truck rumbled into the night. 
BIRTH 
THE mental numbness left me gradually, and my mind went 
back through the years—to a night in April 1921—when the 6 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ship that brought my parents, my two brothers and me to the 
New World had docked not so far from this very pier. "What 
had happened since then was nothing short of a miracle, but 
because it happened in a land of everyday miracles, few took 
notice. 
I was then a gawky boy of twelve, with six English words in 
my vocabulary: "Yes," "no," "hot dog," "ice cream"—the last 
four picked up from the son of a returning missionary aboard 
the Meghali Hellas, which had left the Hellespont a month 
before it anchored here. I was born of Armenian parents in 
Alexandropolis, Greece, in 1909. My first twelve years were 
spent in a world wracked by wa r and violence. There was the 
first Balkan War, and the second Balkan War, then World 
War I, which really began as a Balkan clash and spread far 
beyond the boundaries of the Balkans. 
The cruelest war was that wa ged by the Turk against the 
defenseless Christians of the Near East. The Armenians, the 
most defenseless because they had no government to raise its 
voice in protest, suffered most. One million were martyred. 
The number of maimed and orphaned no one knew. Their 
bleached bones stretched from Turkey to what are now the 
Syrian and Iraqi deserts. The River Euphrates ran red with 
their blood. No one knows the number in our family and 
among our friends who were massacred or driven by the Turk 
to suicide. Turkish officials wallowed in stolen wealth—wealth 
that later helped Kemal Ataturk finance his army and dictator- 
ship. Providentially, the American Near East Relief and Red 
Cross came to the rescue of t hose who survived this Turkish 
genocide. Every Armenian today feels eternally grateful to 
them, and to all of America. 
That painful Old World chapter closed when I began a new 
life in a New World. All that we had dreamed of before com- 
ing here now came true. On our arrival in 1921, father bought 
a home in Mineola, Long Island. In its cramped backyard we 
had a garden, raised chickens , and kept innumerable pets, 
which multiplied with such fecundity that father would ex- The Tree Bears Fruit 7 
claim: "What a rich country this  is. Even the animals are in 
mass production here!" 
Twenty miles removed from the "nationality islands" of 
New York, I grew up much as any American boy. I joined the 
Boy Scouts and the Order of DeMolay. I attended church, I 
fought with school bullies, I ear ned spending money by selling 
subscriptions to the Saturday Evening Post and Ladies' Home 
Journal. The first week after our arrival, I was enrolled in the 
third grade of the Mineola grammar school, and never failed 
a course until I reached algebra. I made the track, football, 
baseball, and debating teams, a nd spoke enthusiastically on 
brotherhood and Americanism. 
In this wholesome, small-town atmosphere (Mineola's pop- 
ulation was then 5,600) I lived at peace with Protestant, 
Catholic, and Jew; Democrat and Republican; Anglo-Saxon, 
old-line American, and European. Our family was accepted 
into this all-American community. Native-born Americans 
were my playmates and my teachers from the outset. 
These were the main influences upon me in my youth, and 
this the environment in which I was molded as an American. 
My idealism—my conception of freedom, democracy, toler- 
ance, the "American Way"—was sh aped in this atmosphere 
for eleven idyllic years, till the end of my college days. The 
Communists would disdainfully call this bourgeois. But such 
is my background in the land of my adoption. By November 
1926 my parents had become American citizens. We cele- 
brated with a feast the eating of which lasted four hours. 
Today, Father is eight years past the three score and ten 
mark, and still carries on a small import-export business. 
Patriarch of the household, he has become an excellent cook, 
especially of difficult-to-make, easy-to-eat Armenian pastries. 
Mother, while she'll never adm it it, is approaching the same 
milestone, and still docs her own housework. But despite that 
honorable mark, she's still fond of hats made from the multi- 
colored plumage shed by the fam ily parrot. She has been col- 
lecting and distributing Polly's feathers for twenty-five years. 8 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
My parents have aged gracefully, and the faces of both are 
lined with life's labor. They are in good health, and ruggedly 
Republican. They consider Herbert Hoover the greatest living 
American., and will defend him with their last breath. This 
loyalty may be due to the fact that Father bears a startling 
resemblance to the Republican statesman. Actually, the rea- 
son is more pragmatic than ideological, at least in my father's 
case. While Father never speculated in stocks, and lost noth- 
ing during the disastrous Hoover regime, he suffered when 
Roosevelt devaluated the dollar to  fifty-nine cents, comparably 
reducing its purchasing power abroad. Being an importer of 
food delicacies, Father lost fort y-one cents out of every dollar. 
He never recovered from the blow , financially or psychologi- 
cally. 
Mother, out of loyalty, joined Father on the Republican 
bandwagon. As soon as they were entitled to vote, in 1926, 
they began to vote Republican, and have clung to the GOP 
like a Bulgarian peasant to his ploughing-bull. They are char- 
ter diehards, the equal of any old-line Anglo-Saxon Republi- 
cans—and proud of it. These are my parents. You must know 
them in order to know me, for as it is said in the Old World, 
the first-born son mirrors his parents. 
My brothers, John and Steven, three and nine years my 
junior, have grown into comforta ble, fairly prosperous middle- 
class conservatives. John is an accountant with a public-utility 
firm. Steven is a successful a ttorney, and has been elected to 
public office. Both served in th e armed forces. They live and 
work in or near Mineola. Both are loved and respected. 
GROWTH 
I AM the rebel of the household. 
I might have followed the same unruffled path except for an 
incident in 1933 which was so violent, and so unprecedented The Tree Bears Fruit 9 
in American history, that it determined for me the course of 
my life. This was the murder of my archbishop, Leon Tourian, 
at the foot of the altar of the Armenian Holy Cross Church in 
New York on Christmas Sunday, 1933.1 He was killed by as- 
sassins who slashed with a butcher knife at the groin of the 
Archbishop as he led the Christmas processional. The mur- 
derers—caught and convicted—pr oved to be members of an 
Armenian political terrorist group called Dashnag, which car- 
ried its Old World feuds to our shores. 
My hatred for organized evil began with the murder of this 
innocent servant of God who had been my priest and a be- 
loved family friend. It was my personal awakening. The mur- 
der, too, was the first sign of how potently Old World hatreds 
had infiltrated into an America that I had considered impervi- 
ous to them. 
There was another factor determining my future. This was 
the depression of the early 1930's, which I witnessed at first 
hand while hitch-hiking across the country. It catapulted me 
into a world of stark realities. At one stroke, my thinking was 
revolutionized. I was ripped away from the idyllic isolationism 
of Mineola, the world of see-no- evil, hear-no-evil, speak-no-evil 
in which I had been reared. I began to question that world. 
I began to probe into its broken promises. 
I tramped with the bonus marc hers, ate slops with them, 
and slept in their miserable shack s on the Potomac. In my in- 
dignation I wrote a long article in the Mineola Sun. What else 
could I do? Hitch-hiking acros s the country, I saw two young 
men in St. Louis attack each other with knives over a loaf of 
bread. I saw others cross the continent in boxcars, looking for 
work. On lower Cherry Street in Kansas City, Missouri, I saw 
women forced to scrape a livin g by offering themselves for 
twenty-five cents a visit. On another street the price was fif- 
teen cents. 
I saw breadlines. The last bread line I had seen was as a child 
of nine in Sofia, Bulgaria, in the winter of 1918. The memory 
1 The incident is described in de tail in Under Cover, pp. 15—16, 20. 10 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of it! The queue was opposite our home, in front of a bakery. 
Old men and women—the young men were either at the 
front, in hospitals, or dead—waited for hours under a driving 
snow for a tin of hot stew and a stale crust of bread. Fifteen 
years later I saw the same sight in the United States. What 
was happening to America? I asked—in this proverbial land of 
plenty. I gathered extensive notes and photographs to write 
a book, but never did so. Instead—fresh out of college— 
I tramped the streets, and visited and revisited the employ- 
ment agencies, as did twelve million others, looking for a job. 
I returned briefly to Mineola, but I knew I had outgrown 
it. I went to New York City, where I worked and lived, for a 
time supporting myself on five dollars a week as a newspaper 
reporter, sleeping in a cold-water skylighted room and eating 
fifteen-cent meals at Bernarr Macfadden's Pennyteria. What I 
had seen and felt made me what some might call a radical. 
An American radical, yes, and somewhat of a reformer; but a 
revolutionist, a Communist, or a fanatic agitator against the 
American way of life, never. I am happy now that my faith in 
democracy was so deeply rooted that I took no stock of any 
promises other than those of my adopted country. Later, it 
pained me to read of those native-born Americans who, hav- 
ing devoted themselves passionately to Communist pursuits, 
recanted publicly—amid loud, commercialized fanfare. 
New York helped complete my education in the world of 
realities. Here were the headqua rters of the German-American 
Bund and the equally notorious Christian Front. New York 
was a symbol of an America that was being corrupted daily by 
the same cancers that had made a living graveyard of most of 
Europe. It was in New York that I saw murder, flop-houses, 
Fascism, Communism. In New York I undertook my under- 
cover investigations for Fortune  magazine—investigations that 
led ultimately to the writing of my first book. New York 
proved a grim tutor. 
And I saw that those evils of Europe which my parents 
came here to avoid were now following us to our new home, The Tree Bears Fruit 11 
like rodents trailing in the shadows. To a sensitive, idealistic, 
religious, immigrant-born youth, the realization was shocking 
and disillusioning beyond words.  Under Cover was the result 
of my labors to expose those who were betraying our democ- 
racy. 
RESOLVE 
THESE were the thoughts that came to me as I faced the 
water, oblivious to the rain, and the conflict of the Old and 
the New Worlds raged inside me. I saw myself as an indi- 
vidual product of that conflict and America as the mass 
product. I saw my adopted country as a treasure house of the 
good that is latent in all men. I saw America, too, as a sanc- 
tuary for those of us who are its immigrants. Our roots, trans- 
planted from Europe, bear fruit here. On free American soil 
we have the opportunity to achieve all the great dreams, all 
the great resolves, all the promises of human dignity which 
are so often stifled and destroyed in the Old World. Here the 
immigrant becomes an American. 
The compulsion to stare into the depths of the blackness 
offshore held me. Yet the more I gazed, unseeing, the more 
swiftly the panorama of my life unfolded, the more calm I was 
growing. My restlessness was slowly being replaced by a curi- 
ous sense of quietude, the turbulence of the inner storm by 
the peace of mind that comes from self-understanding. Out 
of the rain-swept mists, stretching, it seemed to me, to the 
very shores of Europe, came the persuasion, the conviction— 
whatever one may call it—that I must leave my adopted coun- 
try and return to the regions of my childhood; that I must 
seek the ancient earth upon which I had been born. 
As this decision crystalized, a strange thing happened. I ex- 
perienced a great serenity, a great inner peace, a clarity of 
vision unclouded by doubt and uncertainty. This sense of well- 12 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
being grew until I felt enveloped by a warm, comforting glow. 
I was suffused by a surge of strength and what seemed to be 
inspired decision. 
A moment ago the past had unfolded: now the adventurous 
future beckoned. I resolved to  go on an extended odyssey to 
my birthplace, to the distant places of the Middle East, to 
those strange and secret corners of the Old World which are 
outside the paths of the casual visitor. 
I would attempt to interpret the Old World to the New. 
By adopting the techniques I had used in Under Cover I 
would study the forces and intrigues at work against us. As a 
product of the Old World, 1 felt I could gain the confidence 
of those with whom I would talk and live. I would then re- 
turn to tell what I had seen and learned. Whatever lesson was 
to be gained from my experiences and from the comparison 
between the two worlds would be my own way, in these tur- 
bulent and perilous postwar years, of expressing my gratitude 
to America. This I had sought to do during the war years by 
exposing the enemies of my country. 
And standing there in the rain, it came to me that almost 
everything that had happened in my life until this day—the 
curious, sometimes fantastic e xperiences I had had—might all 
have been designed to prepare me for this mission, this investi- 
gation of the forces of hatred festering below the surface from 
London to CAIRO TO DAMASCUS . 
Now the reaction set in. I felt cold. My watersoaked clothes 
were suddenly unbearable. I had to go home, to rest, to sleep. 
I turned up my coat collar a nd began to walk away from the 
river, my head buried in my topcoat. An automobile sounded 
noisily behind me. 
"Hey, you!" 
It was a police patrol car. Once again a flashlight played over 
me, head to foot. 
"What are you doing at the docks at this hour?" the man at 
the wheel asked. The Tree Bears Fruit 13 
"Thinking. I think better when it's raining." 
Silence. Then a voice from his companion. "The guy must 
be batty." 
"What are you thinking about?" the driver asked. 
"About going abroad. I'm going there." 
"Don't try to swim it," his companion said. 
"You work at anything?" the driver asked. 
"I'm a writer." 
"A reporter? What paper?" asked the second man challeng- 
ingly. 
"An author," I said. 
"Got anything to identify you?" the driver asked. 
I handed him my wallet. "You'll find all my papers there," 
I said. "Driver's license, draft card, all you need." 
The two put their heads together, passed my papers be- 
tween them, and the driver handed them back neatly. 
"OK, bud," he said, passing judgment noncommittally in 
the inimitable fashion of police officers. "Better get into some 
dry clothes." 
In the subway train I attempted to sit down but chills ran 
up and down my spine. I stood up all the way to my station. 
When I finally reached home I pulled off my waterlogged 
shoes and left them at the door. I took off my socks and held 
them by their tops between the fingers of my left hand. With 
my right, 1 opened the door. My wet feet marked the rug as I 
tiptoed toward the bathroom. There I threw all my clothes in 
a heap in one end of the tub and stood under a scalding 
shower. As the first rays of th e sun slipped into the bedroom 
I pulled the covers over me and fell into a dreamless sleep. 
When I awoke, it was midnight. I rolled over, and slept peace- 
fully until the dawn of the next day. BOOK ONE   
 (CHAPTER I) 
LONDON: THE ODYSSEY BEGINS 
Inherent in the doctrine of National-Socialism [is] 
the spirit of humanity. . . . Fascism has the capac- 
ity to love. . . . Toleran ce [is the] soapy water of 
humanity. 
Captain Robert Gordon-Canning 
"We are here this afternoon to greet Captain Can- 
ning heartily. He is our distinguished guest, and a 
sincere friend to our people. We immensely thank 
him for his efforts. . . ." 
Grand Mufti of Jerusalem 
MY BUS rumbled past closely built old homes and bombed- 
out buildings. Between them were  empty lots, entirely gutted. 
The aftermath of war lay upon London, this January day in 
1948, like a tattered blanket. Bu ildings were unpainted, the 
plumbing gone, the furniture creaky. To an American accus- 
tomed to lush advertising, the billboards, too, appeared 
strange. They mirrored the plight  of London three full years 
after the end of the war. 
GARMENTS MADE  LARGE OR SMALLER.  SUITS,  OVERCOATS, 
COSTUMES TURNED. 
WASTE PAPER IS STILL VITAL.  ARE YOU SAVING YOURS? 
And then one poster that interested me particularly read: 18 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
If You Are between 18 and 28! 
It You Want a Man's Job 
It You Want to Earn £20 a Month and All Found 
Get into a Crack Force—The P ALESTINE POLICE FORCE ! 
This was only four months be fore the British mandate over 
Palestine was to end and Pales tine was to be partitioned be- 
tween Arab and Jew according to the United Nations deci- 
sion. Why, then, were the British continuing to recruit Pales- 
tinian police? 
"You will see those all over London," someone behind me 
said. 
I recognized an English couple who had been fellow pas- 
sengers on the plane that brought me from New York to Lon- 
don. 
"Well," I said, greeting them, "I never expected to find 
London as run-down as this." 
"Oh, everything's been levele d off—buildings as well as so- 
ciety," the man said. "The wa r and what's happened since 
have driven us to accept the equalities of Socialism. Some like 
it, others will never be reconciled to it." 
"Do you think Communism or Fascism will follow Social- 
ism?" I asked. 
He laughed. "No, most of us aren't so worried about 'isms' 
as you are in the States. Perhaps it's because we have so little 
to lose materially. You Yankees are afraid because you have so 
much of everything. You're lik e the man with a full granary— 
who is afraid of thieves a nd hires bodyguards. We have no 
such fears." 
UNDER COVER IN LONDON 
His last words remained with me  as I returned to my hotel, 
the Cumberland, where I had a room overlooking Hyde Park, 
Britain's historic forum for free speech. Would he be so casual London: The Odyssey Begins 19 
about "isms," I wondered, if he knew to what extent democ- 
racy's enemies were still active? I spent my first night review- 
ing my plans and taking inventory of what I had brought with 
me. There were four cameras (two were later stolen); dozens 
of packs of film, scores of names and addresses; and quantities 
of such delectable items (whi ch were luxuries then) as rice, 
tongue, butter, and bacon, destined as my personal gifts to 
some of London's top political racketeers and hate specialists. 
I knew they would welcome me—not as John Roy Carlson, 
but in the guise I had chosen for myself. 
I had not embarked on my overseas adventure without full 
preparation. My experiences in Under Cover and The Plotters 
had taught me that without careful planning my investigations 
would not only end in disaster hut might lead to a cracked 
skull and worse. 
In Under Cover I posed as George Pagnanelli, an American 
of Italian descent, no better than the hoodlums he traveled 
with, in order to infiltrate into the American Nazi bund and 
be accepted as a trusted worker among our native merchants 
of hate. In The Plotters I was Robert Thompson, Jr., a dis- 
illusioned World War II veteran who was eager to join with 
those Communists, preachers of bigotry, and political thugs 
who preyed on veterans. When th e first copy of Under Cover 
appeared in 1943, George Pagna nelli vanished. When I turned 
in the finished manuscript of The Plotters in 1946, Robert 
Thompson, Jr., followed him. 
But Fascism and Communism in America were only part of 
the over-all world picture. The exposure of the enemies within 
our gates could only be the beginning of my work. I also 
wanted to keep in touch with hate movements abroad, and so 
I invented still another character and established him in this 
field. I created "Charles L. Morey"—and it was as Charles 
Morey that I now began my undercover work in London. 
(Later, when I would reach the Middle East, I knew I would 
have to kill off Morey as I had Pagnanelli and Thompson. 
No native-born white American Protestant—which was what 20 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Morey was supposed to be—woul d be accepted as a confidant 
by the Moslem world.) 
I gave considerable thought to the character and profession 
I'd assume as Morey. I had grown older since my early experi- 
ences in undercover work, and had put on weight. A stranger 
could easily take me for a typical well-fed American business- 
man. That is exactly the character I assumed. 
I invented a business for myself—sales manager of the 
Homestead Farm Appliance Corporation, with offices and 
plant in St. John, Indiana. As Charles Morey I began as early 
as 1945 a wide correspondence with every British hate-monger 
and anti-democrat I read or heard about. There is of course no 
Homestead Farm Appliance Corporation. I had never been to 
St. John, but a trusted friend liv ed there and he forwarded all 
letters addressed to me. 
To give myself prestige, I issued a series of mimeographed 
leaflets—a technique I'd successf ully followed in Under Cover 
—with such intriguing titles as "The American Nationalist 
Decade." I praised Spain as the "European bulwark against 
Communism." My headlines screamed: "The Nationalist 
Flame Is Burning at Home and Abroad," thus rallying to 
my banner the super-patriots abroad. I chastised "Fair Deal 
Harry" and ranted against the "shackles of Communist Wash- 
ington." I also founded the "Federation Against Communism 
—American Section," a simon-pure letterhead organization 
with invented names as officers. I wrote impressively of sub- 
sidizing nationalist organizations throughout the world from 
the limitless funds I either possessed or was capable of raising. 
(As Morey, in short, I represented myself as a one-man Mar- 
shall Plan, dedicated to financing the resurgence of hate move- 
ments and the growth of authoritarian ideology). The combi- 
nation of letterhead, important-sounding leaflets, and dollar 
appeal gained the confidence of  every international bigot to 
whom I wrote. 
Now, in my hotel room, I looked over the names and ad- 
dresses of those with whom I'd developed paper friendships. London: The Odyssey Begins 21 
They were the men and women I wanted to meet face to face 
before going on to the Middle East. I wanted to learn their 
methods; discover their associations with those in our lunatic 
fringe at home and with those promoting evil in the corner of 
the world to which I was going; and above all, to learn how 
both were plotting together to revive the flames they hoped 
would consume democracy. 
Before me was a letter I had received from Victor C. Bur- 
gess, a long-time member of the BUF—British Union of 
Fascists. As Charles L. Morey, I had written Burgess follow- 
ing the tip of an American soldier who had seen him selling 
the Protocols of the Elders oi Zion and similar literature on 
London's streets. Burgess's letter read: 
... I am rather hoping that I can find a number of Na- 
tional Socialist friends in various  countries, who will give me 
an opportunity of ousting the Jews from some of the Export 
trade. . . . Think it over, and let me know. In the meantime 
write again soon, and tell me the latest news of the American 
National Front. I hope that you are slaughtering as many 
Jews as we seem to be doing in Palestine. All the best, 
Yours in Service, 
V. C. Burgess 
I made my first visit in London to him, unannounced, bear- 
ing my gifts of food and cigarettes. I found a man of twenty- 
eight, with watery blue eyes and long brown hair slicked back. 
His face was long and coarse; he was dressed in gray trousers, 
gray shirt, and a khaki jacket. His "export" office proved to be 
a ramshackle hallway room, with  a battered desk and a wooden 
box for a chair. Next door was a room for his wife and two 
children. As one of the children began to cry, Burgess shouted 
from the box on which he was sitting: 
"Shut up, Ralph. Damn that boy. Keep him quiet, Olive. 
Close the door, Olive. Damn it, CLOSE THAT DOOR !" 
Before the door slammed I glanced inside. The room was 22 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
tiny, scmidark, in undcscribable disorder. One child, nude ex- 
cept for a shirt, was crawling on the floor. The other was in a 
crib composed of boards against the wall, with more boards 
above the first, giving the appearance of twin coffins. Both 
children now broke into a howl, disturbing the fuehrer who 
was entertaining a guest from the USA. 
"Olive!" Burgess shouted again. "Will you get them some- 
thing to cat!" 
After this he turned to me. He was very busy now, he said, 
coordinating the resurgent activity of members of former 
BUF units who had joined organizations such as the Sons of 
St. George in Manchester, British Workers' Party for National 
Unity in Bristol, and Imperial  Defence League in Derby. 
"My own outfit is the Union of British Freedom," he said. 
"I kept the initials of the old BUF." He published a hate 
sheet, Unify, for "Britain, King and People." It was a counter- 
part of Gerald L. K. Smith's publication, The Cross and the 
Flag, in the States. 
"One of the boys has an outdoor meeting today. Want to 
come?" 
"I'd be delighted," I said. "I'd like to see you fellows at 
work." 
We walked to a side street near Victoria Park to hear one 
of London's leading rabble-rousers, Jeffrey Hamm. An ex-BUF 
member, now head of the British League of Fx-Service Men 
and Women, Hamm was haranguing a crowd of nearly a thou- 
sand persons. They were not a pretty sight. As Burgess stepped 
away for a moment to talk to a friend, I climbed on a door- 
step and focused my camera to take an over-all picture of the 
crowd and the speaker. But a dozen or more listeners began to 
glare at me. I promptly closed my camera—began frantically 
applauding and cheering Hamm. It was too late. 
In twos and threes men began to move toward me. Their 
plan, as I knew from experience, was undoubtedly to bottle 
me up in the doorway, then push me back into the hallway for 
a beating. I caught them off guard by walking directly through London: The Odyssey Begins 23 
their ranks and rejoining the crowd, hoping to lose myself in 
it. But I was being surrounded. In whatever direction I moved, 
a wall of three or four thugs immediately blocked my way. 
The circles grew smaller, the avenue of escape smaller. 
Any display of panic would have proved my undoing. In 
front of me a powerfully built man who looked like a steve- 
dore turned his head slightly and nodded, at the same time 
backing a step toward me. Behind me, I sensed two others 
move closer. The man in front suddenly wheeled his bulky 
body around and lurched against me, trying to jab his elbow 
into my stomach. An instinctiv e reaction would have been to 
step backward, but from the corner of my eye I had seen one 
of the men behind me doubled over. I would have fallen over 
him and, while on the ground, been kicked in the groin. It 
was an old Bundist trick. Chances of being heard above the 
roaring mob were practically nil. As I saw the elbow lunge 
viciously, I twisted my body at the waist and pivoted. The el- 
bow missed. Frustrated, my assailant turned around. 
"What you got there?" he grow led, and grabbed my camera. 
Someone behind seized my arm. I tried to pull away. Dimly 
I heard: "Throw him out! Give it to him! lie's a Jew!" Cries 
rose all around me. 
Then, somehow, in the swimming faces of the closing 
crowd, I saw Burgess. 
"Burgess! Tell them I'm okay!" I yelled desperately. 
I heard Burgess say: "I know him. Let 'im go." 
The men fell back. The burly man returned my camera, 
then one by one they came up and apologized sheepishly. 
"We were moving in on you," one said. 
"We had you wrong, friend. We thought you were a bloody 
Jew." 
"I can tell he was no Jew. He didn't make a run for it," 
someone else said. 
Still breathing hard, but now surrounded by a loyal body- 
guard, I listened to Jeffrey Hamm. He was tall and stocky, 
with a square face and blond hair . A ferocious and devastating 24 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
speaker, Hamm was rated second onl y to Sir Oswald Mosley,1 
who was in retirement on his fa rm after being released from 
custody. 
"Traitor Churchill, Traitor A ttlee . . . England has been 
sold down the river to America by Traitor Baruch. . . . Brit- 
ain First, England for the Eng lishmen , . . The dirty Jews, 
those miserable creatures crawling around London." 
This sort of baiting delighted the crowd. They roared them- 
selves hoarse. Somebody yelled: "It's time we wiped them 
out!" 
"P J! F J!" some one in the crowd began to chant. 
"What does P J stand for?" I asked Burgess. 
"Perish Judah!" he said. "It's a good slogan." 
"England is not without a leader," Hamm was bellowing. 
"It has a leader. A leader who was for Britain First, first, last, 
and always. Our leader is the greatest living Englishman—Sir 
Oswald Mosley!" 
A deep roar went up from the crowd and echoed across Vic- 
toria Park. 
"Mosley! Mosley! We want Mosley! We want Mosley! 
Heil, Mosley!" All around hands were outstretched in the 
Nazi salute. It was hard to believe that I was in London. 
After the meeting I met Hamm, an educated, smooth- 
speaking man of thirty-one, who had once taught English in 
the Falkland Islands. We went to a pub together and drank 
w a r m  a l e .  H e  t o l d  m e  h e  h a d  been interned in South Africa 
during the war as dangerous to national security, and later 
been allowed to join the British army. Hamm was curious 
about "nationalism in America," how active our groups were, 
and what had happened to Father Coughlin. 
1 The notorious Mosley, former fuehrer of the British Union of Fas- 
cists, studied the teachings of Fascism in Italy. Home Secretary fames Chuter 
Ede disclosed in the House of Comm ons that, according to the former 
Italian ambassador in London, Count Dino Grandi, Mussolini had been 
subsidizing the BUF at the rate of $250 ,000 a year. Mosley visited Germany 
and conferred with Hitler. He is now  active in the Union Movement, com- 
posed largely of former BUF members. London: The Odyssey Begins 25 
"Well do all right here," he said. "It will take time, but 
we'll come back as strong as we were before." 
MR. RAMSAY AND MR. RANKIN 
HAMM, to be sure, was a rabble-rouser, no more. But among 
those whom I wanted to visit was an Englishman who worked 
on much higher levels. He was a Captain Robert Gordon- 
Canning, formerly of the Royal Hussars, who had been in- 
terned during the war for the same reason as Hamm. I had 
first seen his name in a New York Times dispatch from Lon- 
don reporting his purchase at auction of a huge granite bust of 
Adolf Hitler, part of the former property of the German Em- 
bassy, for £500. This was then equivalent to more than two 
thousand dollars. 
I had immediately written to Canning expressing my grati- 
tude for his "act of personal integrity" in saving the priceless 
bust from desecration. Presently I received a reply. After a few 
choice words against the Jews, Canning wrote: "I bought the 
bust of Adolf Hitler with a purpose! To challenge the Jews. 
To prevent purchase by them. To re turn [it] to Germany at a 
suitable time." Thus began a beautiful friendship, which bore 
fruit when Canning put me in touch with the only member of 
Parliament to be interned durin g the war for security reasons, 
Archibald Henry Maule Ramsay. In due time I heard from 
Ramsay, who prefaced his letter with the statement: "Com- 
munism is Jewish in origin, design and purpose." Charles L. 
Morey promptly replied in approp riate terms. In another letter 
Ramsay recommended the best addresses for patriotic litera- 
ture. They were the fanatically  anti-Catholic Alexander Rat- 
cliffe, connected with the Br itish Protestant League, and Ar- 
nold Leese, veteran Jew-baiter a nd publisher of Jewish Ritual 
Murder, which, like the Protocols, had served the Nazis as a 
prime propaganda weapon. 26 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Ramsay was living in London, and I set out to see him be- 
fore visiting Canning, who was at his farm some miles away. 
I found Ramsay in a small inconspicuous hotel. He was an 
unusually tall and gangling Scot, with a pronounced eagle 
nose. This once honored member of His Majesty's Parliament 
was now dressed in a frayed black suit and shoes that had seen 
better days. He had a close-cropped mustache and thinning 
hair. His deep-set brown eyes were settled in circles of wrin- 
kles. He impressed me as austere and snobbish. His first ques- 
tion to me was: "Have you met Tyler Kent in the States?" 
He was referring to the former decoding-clerk of our Lon- 
don Embassy, convicted of betraying the contents of cable- 
grams exchanged between Churchill and Roosevelt to one 
Anna Wolkoff (a pro-Nazi woman of White Russian origin 
living in London). Through her this vital information was to 
be transmitted to Germany thro ugh Italian agents in London.2 
Ramsay was formerly one of the figures in the Nordic 
League, at which William Joyce (Lord Haw-Haw), later 
hanged as a traitor, had spoke n. Ramsay warmed up as we 
talked and proposed an interesting mission for me. Could I 
possibly arrange with "a Representative like Mr. Rankin" to 
cable him (Ramsay), and query whether he did not believe 
World War II had been started by the Jews? This would give 
Ramsay the opening to reply with a blast against the Jews. Ran- 
kin would then insert the correspondence in the Congressional 
Record, after which American patriots would distribute the 
reprints by the thousands, free, under Rankin's Congressional 
stamp. 
I agreed to see Rankin on my return home. 
2 Kent served five years of a seven- year sentence in English prisons. On 
his return to the United States in  1945, Kent's cause was championed by 
Merwin K. Hart of the National Economic Council; J ohn O'Donnell, once 
columnist for the Washington Times-He rald; John I lowland Snow, formerly 
an assistant in Lawrence Dennis's office  (in 1943 Dennis was indicted, with 29 
others, for subversive activities but afte r a mistrial the indictment was dis- 
missed); Gerald L. K. Smith, and othe rs. All of these persons published book- 
lets or articles prot esting Kent's innocence. London: The Odyssey Begins 27 
"Will you also take a message to Tyler and his mother?" 
Ramsay asked. 
"Sure! Just write it down and I'll take it." 
"I shouldn't put it in writing," Ramsay said. "I shall tell you 
later." 
He went on to rant against the Jews. "We're completely 
under their domination here." 
We walked out of his hotel together. With his black bowler 
and his umbrella Ramsay presented a dejected picture of aus- 
terity and loneliness. He was now a jobless, frustrated ex-MP 
living upon yesterday's ragged glory, such as it had been. 
We parted, he to take a train at nearby Victoria Station, I 
looking forward to meeting his friend the next day. 
THE MAN WHO BOUGHT HITLER'S BUST 
MEETING with Captain Robert Gordon-Canning proved far 
more adventurous. As sales ma nager of the "Homestead Farm 
Appliance Corporation," I knew I could expect an English 
gentleman-farmer to ask me many questions. Next to ma- 
chinery in general, I know least about farms, so it was with 
some hesitation that I went to visit him at his farm in Sand- 
wich. I was warmly welcomed and served a brandy, after 
which we went out to inspect his land and stock. Canning had 
inherited considerable property and was obviously wealthy. 
He began to ask about American farms, seed, markets, ferti- 
lizers, and sprayers. As we walked among his fine herds, he 
asked about our dairy industry. If my answers were fantastic, 
I'm sure Canning ascribed them to our American idiosyncra- 
sies. It was a relief when the interrogation finally ceased and I 
turned to study my host. He was a towering, well-proportioned 
man, with a ruddy complexion. Much larger than normal, his 
face was set in a large head with a bald dome, and gave him a 
massive appearance. His eyes were blue, puffy, and encased in 28 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
deep wrinkles, but when he sm iled they twinkled pleasantly. 
His very long upper lip, heavy drawling voice, and full but 
formless mouth gave the impression of a distant and self- 
contained man. 
"At first I took you for a journalist," Canning said. "But you 
have a wide knowledge of fanning and I see now that I was 
wrong." 
Was he hiding his suspicions? I was not sure. But he talked 
freely, and that was what counted. 
"You're an energetic fellow to find your way about so easily 
here. All you Americans are energetic. You're an odd people. 
You believe in humanitarianism abroad, but lynch your Ne- 
groes at home. The Jews, not your Negroes, are the ones to get 
after." 
"You seem to know about us," I said. 
"I once visited the States for Mosley," he confided, "to see 
if American industrialists woul d help us fight Bolshevism." 
He had seen James True and Robert Edward Edmondson, 
pioneer Hitler apologists once indicted for subversive ac- 
tivities. Canning's mission in the early thirties had been a 
failure. Father Coughlin would not see him, nor would Henry 
Ford. "I had breakfast with Lammot du Pont.3 He wasn't sym- 
pathetic at all," Canning said. He then asked me what had 
happened to the America First Committee, to the Silver 
Shirts, and other organizations that had been active. I told 
him they had all been "persecuted by the Jews," and Canning 
said: "It was the same thing here." 
We browsed around the fields and finally went into the 
charming living-room of his farmhouse for tea. Canning grew 
confidential. "I was at Mosley's wedding in Germany. Hitler 
was there as a witness at the ceremony, you know. I used to 
see Hitler in Munich and Berlin, and once had supper with 
Goebbels. Hitler was a fine man, a charming man. If three 
3 Lammot and Irenee du Pont both late r were heavy contributors to the 
National Economic Council. Its presiden t, Merwin K. Hart, has developed 
into a Jew-baiter and a chronic propagandist against democracy. See Under 
Cover and The Plotters. London: The Odyssey Begins 29 
Hitlers had been allowed to rule the world—in Germany, 
Italy, and England—we wouldn't be in the fix we are now, 
because each would have understood the viewpoint of the 
other. . . . Germany is bound to come back strong," Can- 
ning added. 
He was an early member of the BUF, and in a booklet, 
"The Spirit of Fascism," he had written: 
. . . The spirit of freedom runs right through the Fascist 
State, and affords to rich and poor a guaranteed liberty to 
proceed along the chosen road to life. . . Inherent in the 
doctrine of National-Socialism [is] the spirit of humanity. . . . 
Only because of its immense humanity, only because of its 
mystical craving for "absolute union" of the nation, does 
Fascism proclaim its intolerance to those forces which prevent 
the attainment of this spiritual urge. Fascism has the capacity 
to love. . . . Tolerance [is the] soapy water of humanity. 
This was the measure of th e man who had bought Hitler's 
bust. 
We got around to the Jews. "If I were in Palestine, I'd give 
my men twenty-four hours to do with the Jews as they wished. 
Silly humanitarian ism," he said as an afterthought. 
Canning said he knew Anna Wolkoff, friend of Tyler Kent. 
Canning also revealed that he was financing a book on Hitler's 
life. "Couriers" were bringing material direct from Munich 
and returning with instructions. As I was leaving, Canning 
said: "Will you mail these letters for me from London?" 
"Of course." 
We parted warm friends and ag reed to meet again in his 
London apartment. On the train to London—without too 
many qualms of conscience—I opened a letter he had ad- 
dressed to Professor S.  F. Darwin-Fox. Later, in the quiet of my 
hotel room, I photographed, sealed, then mailed the letter. 
Canning had written: "I am surprised that a thousand Jews 
have not been hanged in London during the last forty-eight 30 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
hours.4 There can be no doubt of us being a 'slave race' today." 
I dined twice with Canning at his apartment in Cadogan 
Square, London. These were highl y instructive meetings. For 
this man who bought Hitler's bust, and who—on the basis of 
his writings—might be dismissed as a crackpot, permitted his 
apartment to be used as a meeting-place by Arabs working in 
London. Canning told me he was a close friend of Abdul 
Rahman Azzam Pasha, the Jew-baiting secretary-general of the 
Arab League. He then showed me photographs taken with 
Abd el Krim, the Moroccan rebel leader ("back in the twen- 
ties I tried to make peace between the French and the 
Arabs"), and with other high Arab personalities. A prize in 
his collection was one taken with the Grand Mufti of Jerusa- 
lem. Canning had written a pamphlet, "Arab or Jew," in 
which he reprinted the introduction the Mufti had given him 
at a dinner sponsored in Canning's honor by the Moslem Su- 
preme Council in Jerusalem on November 5, 1929. This was 
the time of the bloody Palestine riots, when the Mufti gangs 
staged pogroms against Palestine' s Jews. Said the Mufti then: 
"We are here this afternoon to greet Captain Canning 
heartily. He is our distinguished guest, and a sincere friend to 
our people. We immensely thank him for his efforts he has 
been unceasingly exerting in support of our cause. . . . The 
Arabs in this country request all their British friends, and our 
distinguished guest, Captain Canning, is of the best of them, 
to be so good enough as to let the noble British people know 
the real facts in this country." 
"I am one of the few Englishmen the Arabs trust com- 
pletely," Canning said proudly, caressing the album containing 
the photograph of himself with the Mufti and others. 
One night, when I knew Canning had invited a group of 
Arab leaders to his home, I dropped in casually at suppertime. 
4 This was in reference to a series of anti-Semitic outbreaks in London, 
Liverpool, Manchester, and other cities , growing out of Jewish reprisals 
against the British in Palestine. London: The Odyssey Begins 31 
Canning greeted me at the door and took me into an ante- 
room. "I'd like to invite you to stay," he said, apologetically. 
"I know you're all right, but my guests are suspicious of all 
Americans." 
A few days later he suggested: 
"Why don't you see Izzed-een Shawa Bey? He's a man you 
ought to know. When you see him, give him my regards." 
IZZED-EEN SHAWA BEY 
I WAS delighted. I hurried to the address Canning gave me. 
It was a small, quiet apartment house of dark brownstone at 
76 Eaton Square, in the exclusive West End section of Lon- 
don. I found myself in a dark, narrow hallway. I studied the 
names under the mailboxes: no Izzed-een Shawa Bey was 
listed. Acting on a hunch, I knocked on the last door in the 
hallway, which had no nameplate attached. After a long wait, 
I knocked again, vigorously, and then shook the handle noisily. 
The door was finally opened by a heavy-set young Arab who 
told me promptly that Shawa Bey was out. 
"I can hear him talking inside," I said, bluffing. "I must see 
him at once." 
The door was closed in my face and I heard a rapid-fire 
exchange in Arabic. Then it op ened again and I was ushered 
into a semidarkened room. Swarthy young Arabs prowled 
about, escorting athletic young Englishmen into side rooms in 
an atmosphere of almost mel odramatic conspiracy. Suddenly a 
door opened and an intense man in his thirties, with piercing 
black eyes and short black mustache, stepped out—instinc- 
tively I knew it must be Shawa Bey—accompanied by a tall, 
blond Englishman. The two shook hands briskly and the Eng- 
lishman left. Shawa Bey turned to me. 
"Come with me," he said curtly. I followed him into an 
office and he closed the door carefully after me. 
Sitting across his desk, I was astonished to see that Shawa 32 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Bey, save for his mustache, look ed more like me than I did. 
Suddenly it flashed through my mind that if I were to raise a 
mustache and acquire a deep tan, I should have no difficulty 
passing for an Arab. I looked at Shawa Bey. How many British 
mercenaries was he hiring? And on what conditions? When 
were they to enter Palestine? By what route? It was too risky 
to ask. 
"Cigarettes?" I offered him my pack of Luckies. 
"I prefer mine to your Ameri can brands. I never change." 
His English was perfect. For a full minute Shawa Bey studied 
me without a word. "What's your nationality, your back- 
ground?" he snapped. 
"American, partly of French ancestry." 
"What are you, a journalist?" He gave me a withering look. 
I laid my calling-card on the desk. "I'm a salesman of farm 
machinery. I'm in England on  business. Captain Gordon- 
Canning suggested I should drop in on you. He sends you his 
greetings." 
"That is different," Shawa Bey said, unfreezing a little. 
"Canning is a very good friend. So you are from America!" 
he mused. "I've been to the States. You know Habib Katibah,5 
of course." I nodded. "Very well," I said. Shawa Bey began to 
talk more freely. "The Jews think America is going to help 
them in Palestine but she won't because there's too much 
feeling against the Jews in the States. The Arabs are well 
armed and well equipped. Many have been infiltrating into 
Jewish territory. We are confident of winning." 
"I plan to go to Palestine myself," I said. "I want to be 
there for the Arab victory." 
"I wouldn't go now," Shawa Bey remarked. "I'd go a little 
later. Once the war starts, it won't take us long." We dis- 
cussed some of the persons I'd met so far. "I've known Cap- 
tain Canning for a long time," he said. "He has helped the 
Arab cause. Another good friend of the Arabs is Miss Frances 
Newton. She has been of great assistance." 
5 Habib Ibrahim Katibah, whose activities are discussed in Chapter II. London: The Odyssey Begins 33 
I asked about the Mufti. 
"He's in good health. He's in Cairo now. He goes back and 
forth between Cairo and Dama scus. He has headquarters 
everywhere in the Middle East." Shawa Bey paused. "These 
next months are very important. The Jews will learn that 
quickly." 
I rose to go. In the outer room, young British veterans of 
World War II in civilian dress were waiting to be interviewed. 
Within a few months I was to see them righting and dying 
for the Arab cause under Arab names. I was to see them buried 
in unknown graves, in Moslem cemeteries, unhonored and 
unsung. I was to see them as prisoners of war in Israel. Izzed- 
een Shawa Bey rose to his feet. 
"Good-bye," he said, "We might meet again in Egypt or 
Palestine." 
If we did, I hoped he wouldn't recognize me! 
Shawa Bey had mentioned the name of Miss Frances E. 
Newton. I looked her up and called upon her immediately. 
She lived near Canning. 
"Who are you?" she asked. She wore a white patch over one 
eye. 
"A friend of Gordon-Canning and of Izzed-een Shawa Bey." 
"Any friend of theirs is a friend of mine," Miss Newton 
said. 
She was a plump, elderly woman. She told me she had lived 
in Jerusalem, and was a Dame of the Order of St. John of Je- 
rusalem. She was also secretary of the Anglo-Arab Friendship 
Society. Its brochure, "The Truth about the Mufti," was a 
complete exoneration of the Mufti, and cited him for his 
"integrity and leadership," comp letely glossing over his role 
as the leading Arab Nazi.6 A signer of the brochure was "Y. 
Bandek, Arab Liaison." Later, Yusif Bandek became an active 
Arab propagandist in the United States, working closely with 
6 The Mufti's role as a war crimin al is discussed in Chapter XXII. 34 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Merwin K. Hart and Hart's friend, Vice-Admiral C. S. Free- 
man.7 
Miss Newton was collecting funds for a new group she had 
organized, British Aid for Distressed Palestine Arabs. Among 
the patrons was Azzam Pasha, the Arab League's mastermind. 
I had only had a glimpse of Miss Newton, but that served 
its purpose. It was only later, after I had been to the Middle 
East, that I began to understand the role played by these men 
and women. 
ROAST DUCK AND ROASTED JEWS AT CANNING'S 
ON THE eve of Lincoln's Birthday, Canning invited me to 
dinner to meet some of his friends. We had become very 
friendly, especially after I had sent the gourmet a pound of 
long-grain rice, then unobtainable in London. Other guests 
were Ramsay, Miss Newton, a friend of Anna Wolkoff named 
Enid Riddell, and Admiral Sir Barry Domville, who before 
his retirement had once been He inrich Himmler's guest in 
Germany, and later was interned during the war. 
The roast duck Canning served was delicious. His egg cro- 
quettes were marvelous. The fruit pudding with butter-rum 
sauce I've never had duplicated  anywhere. We had wine, and 
splendid coffee, always rare in Britain. Canning was a gen- 
erous host. I tried to be an appreciative guest. London was 
aflame over terroristic activities in Palestine and we were at 
no loss for conversation. Between mouthfuls, the Jew was our 
7 See Appendix. 
The facing page reproduces a post war brochure issued after the 
Mufti's Nazi record was known. It "exonerates" the Mufti, claims 
his "integrity and leadership" we re misunderstood, and "explains" 
his criminal record of collaborati on. It is signed by Miss Frances 
Newton, friend of Jew-baiting Captain Gordon-Canning, and Yusif 
el Bandek, one of the chief Arab propagandists sent to this country. 
(For Bandek's activities, and the story of his backers here, see the 
Appendix. The facts on the Mufti are related in Chapter XXII). THE 
ANGLO-ARAB  FRIENDSHIP   SOCIETY 
THE TRUTH ABOUT THE MUFTI 
The Mufti exonerated. Hounded thus 
from one Islamic country to another, where could he be sate ? 
Asia and Africa being closed, it was in Europe alone that no 
Zionist influence could secure his arrest. First in Italy and later 
in Germany, he remained, living in semi-house arrest under 
the close surveillance of the Gest apo, till, when the war ended, 
he moved into a villa near Paris. From France he again moved 
to Alexandria where he now remains in the custody of the 
Egyptian Government. 
It is hoped that in the interest of continued 
good relations between the British and the Arabs, His Majesty's 
Government will re-consider their present attitude towards the 
one outstanding personality in whose integrity and leadership 
the Arabs, both Christians and Moslems, place their confidence. 
The Mufti holds the key. 
To think that the Arabs will accept any proposal for the 
solution of the deadlock in Palestine without the co-operation of the Mufti, would simply be a grave mistake. 
Arab Liaison. 
MOUSTAPHA  H.  WAHBA. 36 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
diet. Between the appetizer and soup, we minced him. Be- 
tween the soup and entree we had him roasted, or hanging 
from Palestinian lamp-posts. Th ereafter the Jew—dead, quar- 
tered, massacred—was with us till we left. 
"Palestine is the only country in the world where the Gen- 
tiles can get theirs in against the Jews," Canning said. We all 
agreed that killing off six hundred thousand Jews would be 
as easy for the Arabs as shooting ducks. 
Miss Newton said she had bought property in Palestine 
many years ago for £3,800 and had sold it to the Jews for 
£47,000. "I plan to have my property back after the Jews have 
been disposed of," she added callously. 
"I give the Jew two years after the Arabs win," Canning 
observed. "The Arabs will do it gradually." 
They discussed Miss Newton's plan to buy ambulances and 
medical supplies for the Arabs. Canning promised to hold 
receptions in his apartment to raise funds. "We'll help behind 
the scenes," he said. "It wouldn't  do for me to appear pub- 
licly on your committee. They'll call you Fascist. The Admi- 
ral has also been smeared. We' ll all work from the sidelines." 
"All of us should help, whether with a rifle in our right 
hand, or with our left hand in our pocket," Admiral Dom- 
ville added brightly. 
"Helping the Arab should come before our efforts at 
home," said Miss Newton. 
"If we break the back of the Jew in Palestine, we have 
broken it for a long time to come," was Ramsay's contribution 
to the conversation. 
INTERNATIONAL HATE-MERCHANT 
I RETURNED to my hotel to find a letter addressed to 
Charles L. Morey which had been forwarded to me from St. 
John, Indiana. It was from a notorious Swedish anti-Semite, 
Einar Aberg. In it he suggested that I ought to write one London: The Odyssey Begins 37 
George F. Green, in care of the Press Club, London. I was 
in London; and a man thus endorsed was worth investigating. 
I lost no time, telephoned him, and he agreed to see me. 
Green headed the Independent Nationalists, and edited 
a British version of The International Jew. His contacts were 
worldwide. Gerald L. K. Smith quoted from his bulletins. 
We, the Mothers, Chicago's leading female hate-contingent, 
not only quoted from them, but also sold The International 
Jew. In Canada Green's correspondent was Adrian Arcand, 
once fuehrer of the Blue Shirts; in Rhodesia, Henry Beamish; 
he had similar correspondents in Argentina, South Africa, 
and Germany. There were many others, of course. 
Green had no sooner greeted me at the Press Club than he 
expressed fears of "surveillance by MI-5" (British Army Intel- 
ligence). "Let's not remain indoors," he said. We walked to 
Victoria Embankment Park. 
He was a short, pudgy, red-faced man, dressed in a worn 
and wrinkled dark suit, and he had about him the air of an 
energetic door-to-door salesman. He had earlier been in adver- 
tising and public-relations work. What teeth he possessed 
were irregular and brown-stained. A goodly number were miss- 
ing, giving his mouth an empty look—but by no means in- 
terfering with his loquacity. 
"I've been busy," he said. "I  had to provide bail for some 
of our members who were arrest ed and fined." He was refer- 
ring to the epidemic of brick-throwing against Jewish shops, 
the rioting and the beating of Jews in a dozen English cities 
and towns. "I don't want to see one brick thrown," Green 
muttered between his missing teeth. "I want to see a million. 
But I'm against too much violence at this time. Bad tactics. 
We're not strong enough. Things  will get better for us as 
England goes down. The Jews are bringing on the crisis. 
When it comes, we'll be in." 
Green talked on. "It's Zionist world-Jewry and their control 
of international finance which is a threat to world peace. I'm 
against giving foreigners citizenship. I'm against internation- 38 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
alism and Communism. The Inde pendent Nationalists is a 
radical and revolutionary party. We're for a Briton's Britain." 
Green continued—now sounding like a Communist—suggest- 
ing once again the alliance possi ble with political extremists: 
"I'm against the exploitation of the people by the privileged 
and the powerful few. I'm against the party system. I'm 
against Monopoly Capitalism. There is no freedom under the 
venal monopoly press. There is no free trade under the inter- 
national cartels. Britain shall not become a Yankee puppet 
state!" 
He added, suddenly: "I wish I were in the States now. Back 
in 1926 I was offered thirty thousand dollars for a promotional 
job. I've looked back to that offer. I wish I had taken it." 
Some time later Green sent a letter to me, part of which I 
reproduce for its brutal forthrightness: 
"I have only one word— JEW. I am not prepared . . . to 
join in any activities which are not fully, openly and efficiently 
directed against all the activities of world-jewry. Racial, politi- 
cal, social, economic—in fact a spiritual and material war on 
jewry. Race is first, fundamental; next comes nationalism. . . . 
Let us by all means unite and work together on the major 
problem, the cause of world-evils: jewry, jewishness, judaism. 
If you can inspire such a united effort of nationalists against 
jewry I am with you wholeheartedly. I am confident that my 
friends in Africa and Sweden are, too. . . . Thank you for 
your card but the reason why I don't go and enjoy the food 
and sunshine you mentioned is the fact that I am now tightly 
fixed in a jewish concentration camp called "England." 
Green assured me that he was friendly with the editor of 
World's Press News, an important British weekly. I was skep- 
tical of Green's claim until he arranged for the three of us to 
meet for lunch. When the editor failed to show up, I was not 
altogether surprised. The very next day, however, I received 
not only an apology but a proof that Green was at least ac- 
quainted with him: London: The Odyssey Begins 39 
I am sorry that I was unable to make the grade today and 
link up with Green to see you, but this is press day and I have 
been very rushed. I shall make a point, however, of contacting 
Green in the next day or two—I have a tentative mission on 
which to see him—and will hope to absorb from him some- 
thing of what you have been able to tell him. 
With regrets, 
Yours sincerely, 
(signed) Arthur J. Heighway 
Managing Director and Editor 
I called on Heighway immediately. By this time I had 
learned that he had written an editorial in the September 25, 
1947, issue calling attention to the Protocols of the Elders of 
Zion. Although admitting that a Swiss court had declared the 
Protocols to be a forgery, Heighway commented: "That 
'forger' seems to have been a prophet of no mean order." I 
wanted to know why he had written this, and whether Green 
had put him up to it. 
My interview was short, for which I was glad. Heighway was 
youngish and prematurely gray. He impressed me as smug 
and self-satisfied. I came to the point and asked him about 
the Protocols. 
"Green gave me a copy," Heighway said, "I don't know if 
they arc truthful or not. That is not the issue. All I know is 
that they fit into present conditions. Maybe some parts are 
faked, but there is enough truth in them to make them worth 
while." 
Heighway's attitude toward a document that had been the 
Nazis' favorite instrument betrayed an amazing lack of repor- 
torial integrity in a man holding an influential position in 
British journalism. I was shocked. 
"Arc you in touch with the Arabs?" I asked. 
"Why, yes. I met Shawa Bey recently at luncheon. Let's 
see . . ." Heighway raked through a sheaf of calling cards 
and found what he was looking for. "Here it is—Izzed-een 
Shawa Bey." 40 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"I know," I said, "Mr. Green asked me to look him up, 
too." 
"Very intelligent fellow," Heighway commented. "Knows 
what he is doing." 
"What is he doing in London?" I asked. 
"Organizing British ex-servicemen for the Palestine show. 
He's got five hundred of them, all trained men, and he's got 
officers to train them further." 
"Do you intend to press the Arab viewpoint in World's 
Press News?" 
"Well, we're supposed to be neutral," Heighway an- 
swered. "But if there's a newsbreak we'll see what we can do." 
He laughed toothily, and I left him. 
In my hotel room my last night in London, I packed for the 
next leg of my journey to Cairo. As Charles L. Morey I had 
met those I had wanted to meet and had been given an in- 
structive introduction to what I might expect in the Middle 
East. I sent to New York large quantities of hate-literature for 
my files; and I had also sent a thick envelope of notes. All this 
I knew, however, did not reflect the real, the democratic Eng- 
land. 
For as a people, I had found the average Britisher decent, 
law-abiding and even-tempered. I had begun to understand 
why the British always pull through; and I had begun to ap- 
preciate their moral strength, their emotional maturity which, 
it seemed to me, helped explain why they were able to gravi- 
tate into the orbit of Socialism without a violent revolution. 
The Burgesses, the Cannings, and the Greens were not typical 
of the British. Nothing, I felt, so truly typified the British 
spirit as did Hyde Park, the very Hyde Park I could look down 
upon from my room in the Cumberland. 
One unforgettable Sunday night, as a cold drizzle fell, I had 
strolled by when a lean, hungry-looking man in cap and 
Bowery-like overcoat began to lead a group in old-fashioned 
hymns. There were many young people and a sprinkling of London: The Odyssey Begins 41 
soldiers in the crowd. Perhap s it was the faces of these young, 
earnest men and women, or perhaps it was the nostalgic mem- 
ory of my choir-singing days as a boy in the Old World—but 
I was deeply stirred. I joined them, singing the hymns I had 
learned in Sunday school in Mineola. I felt, somehow, that I 
belonged with these, the unde rprivileged and unheralded. 
Around me were men and women who for years had lived 
in the cavernous depths of subway tunnels, survived the diet 
of fish paste and horse meat, wore the same clothes months 
on end, and faced every conceiva ble hardship with fortitude. 
They could never be truly crushed or defeated. If such a peo- 
ple still kept faith in their nation and faith in their God, and 
prayed to Him with hymns under a drizzle that chilled me to 
the bone—then such a people, I felt, with God's help should 
and would live forever. For this was the home of freemen, of 
brave and devout men. The last vision I have of Hyde Park is 
that of the lean Englishman in the Bowery coat using a 
stubby pencil as baton, leading the group in Abide With Me. 
I felt that was the real Englishman, the real England. Not 
the imperialistic England of ruthless colonial rule, not the 
England of the British lion, its tail twisted by Eire, Iran, and 
others yet to come, nor yet that of the English bulldog snarl- 
ing at the dark peoples of the world, but an England of pious, 
humble, kindly men and women. As I saw it, there was much 
to be condemned in their tole rance of the immoral interna- 
tional standards set by their Foreign and Colonial offices, but 
I felt that whatever they, the people, undertook to do, they 
would do calmly, without hysteria. They had faith in their 
country, in their God, and in themselves. 
Early the next morning I visited a physician and was inocu- 
lated against cholera. At noon I was aboard a plane flying 
east—eastward via Switzerland to Cairo, heart of the Moslem 
world, neighbor to the Holy Land now preparing for a life- 
and-death struggle on an ancient battlefield. (CHAPTER II) 
CAIRO: THE KING'S JUNGLE 
 
"You will maybe like this!" The Arab demonstrated. 
What seemed to be an ordinary whip suddenly be- 
came a vicious, four-sided, ten-inch dagger tapering 
to a fine point. "This knife for Yahood. But maybe 
you Amerikans like Yahood, yes?" 
I took no chances. "No, 1 hate Jews. Allah's curse 
on them." 
THE plane dipped sickeningly. I attempted to struggle up- 
right in my seat but the safety belt held me like a straight- 
jacket. I groaned. 
I was in a state of delirium from my cholera shot. There 
was no doubt that it had taken. A red welt the size of a mush- 
room was rising rapidly. A high fever ran through me. Twice 
I had stumbled while walking to the plane, for the fever 
burned at my temples like a scourge. Once in the plane I had 
fallen into my seat, and tried to doze off—awakening in fits 
and starts, each time with a sense of impending doom. Sud- 
denly I let out a cry. Though I thought I had suppressed it, 
the hostess hurried to my side. 
"Look! We're going to hit that mountain!" 
"That's the Matterhorn," she said quietly. "We won't hit 
it." 
The Matterhorn was a terrifying sight in the blue-white Cairo: The King's Jungle 43 
light of early dawn. A giant sheath of awesome rock, it 
leaped up from the depths of the earth to the heavens, a flame 
of stone nearly three miles high. It seemed alive to my tor- 
tured eyes, like a Cyclops challenging our flight. It was the 
most sinister peak in the glowering, snow-capped mountains 
that reared their white crests on either side as we roared per- 
ilously between them at more than four miles a minute. 
I had no recollection of the rest of the trip. I have no idea 
of the route. I took neither food nor drink. I suffered night- 
mares. I writhed and tossed and broke out in wave after wave 
of alternate hot fevers and cold sweats. ... It was symbolic. 
I was leaving the West and plunging into the maelstrom of 
the Middle East—a transition from one world to another 
radically different. The Eastern world—the world of tomor- 
row's major revolution—was bathed in anarchy and in blood- 
letting, a mirror showing the face of man as no man would 
wish to see it. . . . 
I awoke to hear the hostess announce: "We are landing in 
Cairo." 
It was seven p.m., exactly on schedule. The day was March 
2, 1948. "The month of March, the month of trouble," 
Mother used to say. By an odd coincidence it was on March 
I, 1921, that we left the Old World to come to the New. 
Now, exactly twenty-seven years later, I was returning to the 
Middle East, that mysterious, often sinister part of the world 
about which we really know so little, and that little so glam- 
orized and distorted by partisans as to resemble fiction more 
than truth. 
THE KING'S JUNGLE 
I ALIGHTED from the plane into the jungle of Almaza 
Airport (where an advocate of  "white supremacy" would cer- 
tainly have had instant apoplexy). We were herded by a 
dozen  dark-skinned  officials  and   plainclothesmen  wearing 44 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
fezzes— in Egypt called a tarboosh—into an enclosure. To call 
it barnlike is to dignify that square-shaped factorylike ware- 
house with its low ceiling, its sickly yellow lighting and its 
wild melange of milling, sweating men. We were lined up 
against a counter under a huge photograph of King Farouk, 
while a slovenly official in blue serge and tarboosh took his 
place behind a rough wooden table and began to check our 
names twice against what was evidently a blacklist. Ahead of 
me in the line was a passenger whom I recognized by his name 
as Armenian. I struck up a conversation with him. He was a 
well-to-do merchant who had escaped from Rumania a step 
ahead of the satellite police. Ev entually he hoped to reach 
Brazil. 
"The Turks killed my father and brother and burned our 
home. The Nazis killed my other brother. Only my mother is 
alive in Rumania. She begged me to leave in hopes that I 
could keep alive the family name." 
The bureaucracy at Almaza Airport was appalling. Pass- 
ports were tossed from hand to hand; baggage was examined 
and re-examined; orders were  shouted and replies shouted 
back; every official managed to interfere with the work another 
had done or was trying to do—and all this amid an ear-split- 
ting babble of screaming and hysterical, gesticulating argu- 
ment. A horde of porters, idlers, and hotel agents streamed 
through an exit to my left. Every few minutes, when the 
clamor grew unbearable, an official would literally howl above 
the tumult. There would be a momentary silence and then the 
noise began again. 
The porters were a far cry from what I had been accus- 
tomed to in the United States. Th ey were dressed in catch-as- 
catch-can clothing—some in European dress or parts thereof; 
others in the traditional costume of the Egyptian fellah, or 
everyday laborer, consisting principally of a long-sleeved cot- 
ton nightshirt called a gallabiya, which came almost to the 
ankles. It was open at the neck and revealed cither a vest or 
naked skin. The feet were bare, or sometimes encased in Cairo: The King's Jungle 45 
sandals, the toes protruding. A few wore a sash around their 
waists. Some had brightly colored calico skullcaps. The cheeks 
of some of the darkest-skinned were scarred with deep vertical 
gashes—tribal decorations. Th ese were Sudanese, natives of 
the great rich land to the south of Egypt. 
In some concern I asked my Armenian friend: "Where 
are you going to sleep tonight?" I had made no plans for my- 
self. 
"I have reservations at the Continental Hotel," he said. 
"Suppose I go there with you," I suggested. "If I don't get 
a room, will you let me sleep on the floor?" 
He smiled. "Oh, I don't think it will be that bad," he said. 
And then he spoke with Armenian hospitality: "But, please, 
you are welcome to use my bed. I can sleep on the floor—it 
will not be a new experience for me." 
More than two hours later, we were still trapped in red 
tape and inefficiency in the airport. When we were finally 
cleared by the customs it was ten p.m. We emerged through 
the doors with a sigh of relief, only to find ourselves plunged 
into a new bedlam as porters, id lers, hotel-hawkers all lunged 
at our luggage at the same time, pulling us in half a dozen 
different directions. 
"Please, sair, my hotel is the best in Cairo, with hot water 
and clean beds. . . ." 
"Please, sair, there is no better hotel in Egypt. This way, 
sair." 
We fought our way to a taxi, carefully supervised the load- 
ing of our bags, and hurled ourselves inside. We left behind 
us the jungle of Almaza Airport and two loudly protesting 
nightshirted porters who had r eceived the equivalent of a 
dollar tip. 
"Give them a pound,"1 the driver muttered in heavily ac- 
cented English, "and they will still curse you." 
Cairo, an hour or so before midnight, was wide awake. 
Many shops were open and th e sidewalks were crowded. 
1 The Egyptian pound was then worth $4.12. 46 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Despite my fears, there were rooms available at the Conti- 
nental, a long-ranging hotel with a terrace fronting on one of 
the city's main streets. We each drew a long, bare, high-ceil- 
inged room, its furniture consisting of a bureau with fly- 
specked mirror, a mat, a washbasin, and a high, squeaky iron- 
poster bed. We ordered a midnight snack, served by a 
white-robed Sudanese waiter wearing a high red fez. As we 
ate, my Armenian friend spoke bitterly of his experiences. 
Had the police, he wondered, seized his mother, perhaps tor- 
tured her to learn his whereabouts? Was she even alive at this 
moment? He was eating the good, rich food of Cairo: had his 
mother even a hard crust of bread? 
"Asvadez medz eh," I said to him in Armenian. "God is 
merciful." 
Then we separated and went to our rooms. 
Tired as I was, I lay for a long time, thinking, before sleep 
came. My plans, for the moment, were not too clear. One 
man I had to see: Ahmed Hussein, leader of the Green Shirts 
of Egypt, who I knew had been in the United States lecturing 
and organizing as an Arab agent. I counted on him to intro- 
duce me to the undercover world of Egypt. But I felt, intui- 
tively, that I must not be overcager. First, I must get the feel 
of Cairo; learn something of the customs, habits, peculiarities, 
even smells, of Egypt and its people. So far as anyone was 
concerned, I was no longer Ch arles Morey. He now van- 
ished and I became myself, using my real name—an American 
of Armenian descent, a Christian sympathizer with all things 
Egyptian and Arabic. 
And on that thought, I fell asleep. 
I was awakened, it seemed only a few hours later, by the 
braying of a donkey. I looked at my wrist watch. Six a.m.! 
At first I thought this a novel, even romantic way to be 
aroused, but that fiendish animal awoke me punctually at 
the same unearthly hour every morning of the twenty-nine 
days I stayed at the Continenta l. I devised wild schemes to 
silence it. I thought of threatening its master, of hurling a Cairo: The Kings Jungle 47 
well-aimed flowerpot, of poisoning it in some ingenious man- 
ner, but from my window I could not even see my enemy. 
Nor did I ever find him—the loudest-braying donkey in Cairo! 
My initiation into the rough and tumble of Cairo street 
life began as soon as I came down the steps of the hotel ter- 
race. At once I found myself the coveted prize of three night- 
shirted men fighting the priv ilege of accosting the newly 
arrived foreigner. The winner—the fiercest in manner, voice 
and face—won by jabbing the others with his elbow, accom- 
panied by threatening gestures with an ugly black whip he 
obviously carried for that purpose. For a full block as I walked, 
ignoring him, the dragoman kept at my side, chattering ex- 
citedly in English, offering to show me the sights of Cairo, 
the Pyramids, the bazaars, the rest aurants. I played mute lest 
he learn that I was an American, universally considered a 
millionaire, or at least a fool with money. 
"Allah, Allah. Leave me alone!" I growled finally. "I don't 
want anything." 
"Ahhhh, you are Amerikan!" He grinned at me like an old 
friend. "Welcome. Amerikans I love very much. I have many 
Amerikan friends. See, sair, I have letters from Ameri- 
kans. . . ." He began producing testimonials to his abilities 
as a guide. "Amerikan ladies say how wonderful my serv- 
ive. . . ." He stuck his card in my hand. 
Every morning thereafter, like the braying donkey, for 
twenty-nine mornings Abdel Baki Abdel Kerim went through 
the same ritual. Nothing I could do made any impression 
upon him. The moment he accosted me, grinning his grin of 
love and affection, I would yell NO! in a voice loud enough to 
shatter windows across the street. Abdel Baki Abdel Kerim 
was never discouraged; after trotting along with me for a 
block, he would stop, wave his hand in salute, and shout 
happily after me: "Tomorrow, sair, please, I see you again 
tomorrow." 
Uncannily, he always saw me first. After a while I accepted 
my fate and took "Dragoman No. 12" for granted, and even 48 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
used him as a source of information. Many hustlers of his 
type earned a livelihood by any and every means: as guides to 
the city; as liaison to hasheesh  dives; as commission merchants 
for perfumes, jewelry, handbags ; as money-changers and black- 
market operators; as procurers of women and men as well. 
Homosexuality was a socially acceptable vice practised com- 
monly in all Arab countries, as I was to learn. Dragomen were 
prepared—for money—to supply me with any commodity, 
human, animal, or vegetable, and to suspend all judgment on 
my morals. 
Business was bad on all fronts, Abdel Baki complained. 
Tourists had been frightened by a recent cholera epidemic; 
there was a great deal of suspicion and hatred of foreigners, 
particularly among hot-headed students and "political" men 
who didn't realize how fine a nd splendid American tourists 
were; and to add to all the trouble, tourists were frightened 
by the long-awaited Arab-Jewish war in neighboring Palestine. 
"Ah, sair, the Jews . . ." he said. 
I MEET THE POLICE 
HALF of my day in Cairo was spent keeping out of jail. I 
began the morning determined to photograph a near-by 
mosque, magnificent with its slender stately minaret silhou- 
etted against a breathtakingly blue sky. 
I focused my camera but hadn't even pressed the shutter 
when I became aware that someone was watching me. A 
short distance away stood a po liceman, dressed in a shapeless 
black wool uniform and the ever present red fez. I closed my 
camera and nonchalantly moved on. Glancing in a showcase, 
I saw him nearing me. A moment later a heavy hand plum- 
meted down on my shoulder, and another grabbed my camera, 
nearly ripping the shoulder strap. He pulled me over to a 
trafEc officer and the two jabbered excitedly. A surly crowd Cairo: The King's Jungle 49 
gathered. It was decided that my fate should be sealed in the 
Karakol Abdin Kism—the Abdin District Police Station. 
Flanked by the two policemen, and followed by a crowd 
yelling "Yahoodi"—Jew—we walked on. Once I turned 
around, and beating my breast lik e an outraged patriot, I 
shouted: "I am an American!" 
"Then you are worse than a Jew!" someone yelled in perfect 
English. 
Those in front rushed up, tried to jab me with their sticks, 
and threatened me with their whips. Most Egyptians appar- 
ently carried one or the other, handy for warding off flies, 
urchins, or would-be thugs. Had not the police flailed back 
savagely, I might easily have been mauled. A few months later 
an American, Stephen A. Haas of Philadelphia, sight-seeing 
with his wife and an Arab guide, was fatally beaten while 
police looked the other way.2 
Once inside Abdin Station, an arsenal bristling with police, 
each of my two captors grabbed one of my arms and vigorously 
pushed me into a dark room. Dozens of rifles were leaning 
against its walls. On a shelf above were several dozen black 
shields—obviously used by the police when they charged riot- 
ing mobs. In one corner were p iled handcuffs and loaded bam- 
boo poles; in another, three -foot-long wooden clubs, appar- 
ently companion pieces to the shields. I was unceremoniously 
shoved before Sergeant Abdel Fattah of the Criminal Investi- 
gation Department. 
"Your passport," he said as soon as I entered. 
2On July 17, 1948, Haas was attack ed by a mob near the Citadel. 
Stabbed and left dying on the street, he was finally picked up and taken to a 
police station. There he died in the pr esence of his wife, who had to stand 
by helplessly as her husband bled on the floor where he had been flung by 
the police. Nor could she seek help from the United States consul or from 
doctors, according to  newspaper reports. 
Our charge d'affaires vigorously pr otested against "the unwillingness of 
certain Egyptian police to intervene prom ptly and effectively, and of their 
totally unwarranted and inexplicable effo rts to prevent Mrs. Haas from com- 
municating immediately with the American Embassy." Later three Egyptians 
were arrested. Eventually they were released and nothing further happened. 50 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
He stood up as I approached. The two police made their 
complaint. Sergeant Fattah stared at me for a moment im- 
passively, and then sat down and began to write. He wrote for 
ten minutes in slow Arabic characters, proceeding from right 
to left, asking questions as he scribbled. The police nodded. I 
had said nothing up to this time, and finally ventured: "All 
I wanted was to take a picture of a beautiful mosque." 
"In a few minutes we will finish," Sergeant Fattah said po- 
litely. He left for a moment and returned with three plain- 
clothesmen. They took positions on either side and behind me. 
Then they rearranged themselves, studying my face from every 
angle. I felt history was repeating itself. Back in the days with 
the Bund and the Christian Front, anti-Semitic thugs would 
similarly study me to determine if I were Jewish. 
"I am a Christian American," I found myself saying. 
"You may smoke if you wish," said Sergeant Fattah. "In a 
few minutes we will finish." 
Another culprit was pushed in—a cross-eyed man, bare- 
footed, dressed in a filthy nightshirt. Still another was brought 
in—limping, with running eyes; he was shunted to one of the 
other desks. A third, dressed in a semi-military costume, was 
yanked in by his scruff, and stood cowering. At least, all three 
got action, for they were taken away at once. 
"What are you going to do with me?" I finally asked Ser- 
geant Fattah. 
"In a few minutes we will finish." It was the third time he 
had said it. 
"I would like to telephone our embassy," I said. 
"Yes, you can telephone. I will take you to a telephone." 
Led by the sergeant and followed by my two policemen, I 
crossed a room teeming with police and wretchedly dressed 
men and women under arrest. We finally arrived in a dungeon- 
like cubbyhole under a staircase. Painted black up to the 
height of my shoulders, it was a damp, filthy hold smelling of 
sweat, with no ventilation except a tiny barred window high Cairo: The King's Jungle 51 
above us. Behind an ancient, battered switchboard sat Cairo's 
most excitable man: a gray-haired toothless police officer with 
a face like well worn brown leather and two earphones perched 
over his bald head. In front of him were two old-fashioned 
desk phones and a mouthpiece protruding from the switch- 
board, and into these he screamed alternately. Evidently there 
were no extension phones in the building, for he would scrawl 
a message, howl for a courier, and scream at him to hurry 
with it. I watched, fascinated by the sight of this toothless 
old man frantically and conscientiously trying at this antique 
board to handle all the incoming and outgoing messages of an 
extremely busy police station. Every few minutes he would rip 
out all of the plugs, slam down both phones, clamp his fist 
over the mouthpiece, pull off the earphones, and glare, like a 
madman in a fit of temporary sanity. I could not blame him. 
Any man could easily go out of his mind in that black 
dungeon. 
I was in line to make my call when he suddenly stiffened. 
Apparently an urgent message was coming in. He gestured to 
us to be quiet, listened intently , then chattered excitedly. Ser- 
geant Fattah said it was from the "European Division" and it 
concerned me. For the next few minutes my fate hung in the 
balance, as the operator wrote the message while the two 
phones jangled madly. Finally he gave the note to the ser- 
geant, who read it silently, and then motioned me to follow 
him. We retraced our steps, the two police clinging behind 
me like bloodhounds. 
When we arrived at his desk, Sergeant Fattah announced 
that he was compelled to keep my camera pending further in- 
vestigation. Paper, cord, and sealing wax were brought. My 
camera was wrapped as carefully as any of Pharoah's mum- 
mies, and tucked away in a desk drawer, with the promise that 
it would be returned to me. I was free. 
Returning to my hotel room, I delegated my hat—a col- 
lapsible Stetson—to the bottom of my suitcase. It definitely 52 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
marked me as a European. I unpacked my second camera, a 
flat folding type,8 put it inconspicuously in my coat pocket and 
sallied out again. At a near-by sidewalk cafe I took a scat and 
ordered a jet-black, sickly sweet demi-tasse. 
Cairo's daily life swirled around me. Men in gallabiya went 
by with swishing skirts. Copper-skinned Bedouins walked past 
in native burnous (muslin cloak, sweeping down to their feet) 
and khaffiya (a linen headdress,  usually white, worn over the 
head, and falling over the neck.) Rare, white-skinned, un- 
veiled Egyptian beauties mingled with parchment-faced ortho- 
dox Moslem women wearing their black yashmak, veil. Swarms 
of urchins who apparently hadn't bathed since birth ran about 
looking for opportunities to beg or pilfer. Hawkers peddled 
combs, wallets, contraceptives, and whips. One peddler who 
came to my table was particularly insistent, although I re- 
peatedly waved him away. He was a keen-faced young man. 
"You will maybe like this!" the Arab demonstrated. What 
seemed to be an ordinary whip  suddenly became a vicious, 
four-sided, ten-inch dagger tapering to a fine point. "This 
knife for Yahood. But maybe you Amerikans like Yahood, 
yes?" 
I took no chances. "No, I hate Jews. Allah's curse on them." 
"Ah," he grinned triumphantly. "Then you buy knife to 
kill Yahood?" 
"No. I have one bigger, a Turkish knife. I kill Armenians 
and Jews with it." 
Sly money-changers sidled up to me. A beggar in tatters and 
the face of a mummy stretched out a palsied hand in the name 
of Allah. Cabmen drove with one hand on the wheel, the 
other on the horn, shouting at jaywalkers. Donkeys hee-hawed 
interminably from every quarter. Powdered horse-dung, finely 
ground under the wheels of carriages, was wafted by every 
passing breeze into my nostrils and into my cup of coffee. 
Swarms of green-black flies patronizingly came to my table 
8 Weltur, with Zeiss Tessar f/2.8 lens, taking 2 1/4 x 2 1/4 pictures. With 
it I took most of my subsequent photographs. Cairo: The King's Jungle 53 
after feasting at fresh droppings everywhere. Two students now 
approached me, selling anti-Jewish stamps in support of a 
war fund. By this time I knew the answers. 
"I love Cairo, queen of Arab cities. Give me two dollars' 
worth." 
"Thank you, thank you, Amerikan. We wish you good for- 
tune." 
An hour later their good wishes came true, for the two dol- 
lars proved the wisest investment I made in Cairo. 
After my coffee, I decided to stroll along a main street, 
pledging myself to keep out of trouble. But a camera in the 
pocket of a photographer burns like idle money in the hands 
of a gambler, I looked around carefully, up and down the 
block. I whipped out my camera and sighted the window of 
an attractive pastry shop. Surely there could be nothing sub- 
versive in photographing luscious, syrupy, mouth-drooling 
baklawa and katayef—pride and joy of Oriental pastry. 
Without warning, someone from behind struck down my 
wrist, and clutched my sleeve. A short, stocky, wild-eyed 
Egyptian was chattering at me. 
"OK, take it easy, take it easy," I said, pocketing my camera. 
"Ahaaa! You Amerikan?" He became more excited. Grip- 
ping my sleeve in a clutch of steel, he shouted for help. A 
dozen passersby rushed over, surrounding me. Off we went 
again double time, to the karakol. Luckily, this time it was not 
the Abdin Station but another, the Mouski District Police 
Station. In the howling mob that followed was a youth who 
spoke a few words of English. In his hands were sheets of the 
same stamps I had bought a few minutes earlier. 
Into the karakof we trooped. Th is time, Allah was with me. 
The sergeant I confronted smiled at the accusations of the 
wild-eyed Egyptian who had seized me. When I showed my 
anti-Jewish stamps, and proclaim ed that the Egyptians were 
the elite of all the Arabs, the English-speaking youth cham- 
pioned my cause. His voice could scarcely be heard, because 
by this time everyone, including the sergeant, was screaming at 54 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the top of bis lungs, trying to prove my innocence or guilt. I 
joined the grim fun. "Yahood, nix Yahood, no good!" I 
screamed above everybody else in makeshift Arabic. "Arabi 
good. Arabi good!" I put my right hand over my heart in token 
of my esteem for the Arab. 
My new-found stamp-selling friend and the sergeant were 
convinced of my Arab patriotism. The fanatic who had hauled 
me in, and those who had swarmed after us, wanted me pun- 
ished, Allah knows for what. Du ring the melee, the sergeant 
winked, and motioned with his head toward the door. I took 
the hint, and slipped out at the height of the scrimmage. 
Several' of the street mob were waiting outside. I passed 
them by with a smile and a greeting, waving the stamps be- 
fore them. 
I felt I was being followed, and tried devious methods to 
shake off anyone who might be trailing me. I was outwitted. A 
few blocks from the Continenta l, two bearded youths came up 
to me, one on each side. They spoke excellent English. They 
said they were students at Fouad University. Both were op- 
posed to the anti-Jewish demonstration that had been taking 
place in Cairo. As a foreigner, did I not think such mob action 
was shameful? 
I admonished them for their lack of patriotism. What man- 
ner of Moslems were they? To ga in favor in the sight of Allah 
one must demonstrate against the Jews. "Even though I am 
a Christian, I swear by the holy beard of your Prophet that I 
wish the Jew nothing but ill luck during all his days on earth 
and in the hereafter. May Allah always smile with good for- 
tune on the Arab cause." 
The two changed tactics immediately. They were delighted 
to know that not all Americans were pro-Zionist. One of them, 
named Gamal—a tall, thin, wiry student—gave me his address 
and asked me to call on him. They shook my hand cordially. 
As we were about to part, a turbaned head leaned out of the 
window of the house in front of which we were standing. A 
voice asked the time. Cairo: The Kings Jungle 55 
"It is time for the evening prayer," Gamal said, and the 
dark face withdrew. 
"Fiemen el lah (God be with you), good Amerikan." 
"Fiemen el lah," I returned. 
AHMED HUSSEIN—ARAB FUEHRER 
HAVING had these indications of how Egypt treated the 
stranger, I warily began my investigation of Ahmed Hussein, 
fuehrer of the fanatic Green Shirts, more formally known as 
Misr el Fattat, the Young Egypt Party. I was sure I could 
meet Hussein by posing as a friend of those he knew in the 
United States. I knew Hussein's background. During the war 
he had been placed in custody for pro-Fascist sympathies. In 
1942, with Rommel and his Afrika Korps hammering at El 
Alamein, one of Hussein's colleagues, a Green Shirt leader, 
led street demonstrations, screaming at the top of his voice: 
"Advance, Rommel. Please, Rommel, come quickly to Egypt." 
Before the war Hussein had visited Italy, toured Fascist 
youth camps, and returned tremendously impressed. He also 
went to Germany, but got a cool reception. He then wrote a 
pamphlet, "Message to Hitler!" inviting Hitler to achieve 
peace of soul by embracing Islam, "the religion of God's unity 
and of solidarity, the religion of order and leadership." 
In New York some of Hussein's writings were distributed by 
Habib Katibah (the same Katibah whom Shawa Bey in Lon- 
don asked me if I knew), who was frequently seen with 
Hussein when the latter visited the United States in 1947. 
Katibah's background is revea ling. He had founded the Arab 
National League, a propaganda agency which received the en- 
dorsement of World Service, the notorious Nazi propaganda 
mill, for its efforts in "spreadi ng the truth." Another founder, 
Dr. George Kheiralla, received assurances from James Wheeler- 
Hill, once Bund national secretary: "Our own organization 56 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
will work with you 100% and do whatever possible to assist 
you." 
After Pearl Harbor the League was dissolved, but in 1945 
Katibah suddenly reappeared on the letterhead of the stream- 
lined Institute of Arab American Affairs, listing on its ad- 
visory board such prominent Americans as Kermit Roosevelt, 
Virginia C. Gildersleeve, dean emeritus, Barnard College; and 
William E. Hocking, professor em eritus, Harvard University. 
After a while Katibah's name disappeared from the letterhead, 
and was replaced by that of Khalil Totah as executive director. 
Katibah, however, remained very much on the scene. 
As tension mounted in Palestine, Katibah, the extraordinary 
Benjamin H. Freedman4 (whose name was originally listed 
on the Institute letterhead, but was later mysteriously X'd 
out), and R. M. Schoendorf—in reality Mrs. Freedman— 
sponsored a series of advertisements under the imprint of "The 
League for Peace With Justice in Palestine." An apostate Jew, 
Frcedman's political views and extreme aversion for Zionism 
and his own people took such violent expression that he was 
esteemed by America's leading Jew-baiters, ranging from the 
psychopathic to a more dangerous variety. Merwin K. Hart 
joined Frcedman's camp by devo ting several issues of his bi- 
weekly bulletin to Freedman's fulminations that "a small 
minority of Jews has maneuvered itself into a position where 
it can use almost the whole of Western Christendom as its 
tool"; and that "Soviet Communism will succeed in its at- 
tempt to conquer the world in direct proportion to the sup- 
port which America gives to Zionism." 
While Hussein was lecturing in the United States, he was 
represented in court proceedings by a Brooklyn attorney 
named Hallam Maxon Richardson. Richardson, attorney for 
numerous "nationalist" clients, had once written an introduc- 
4 Freedman came into the news again in 1950, as one of the master- 
minds behind the abortive attempt to pr ove that Anna M. Rosenberg, chosen 
by Secretary of Defense George C. Marshall as U. S. manpower chief, was a 
Communist. Freedman later withdrew the fantastic charge.  
 58 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
tion to a book by Joseph E. McWilliams, speaker at Bund 
meetings and fuehrer of the pro-Nazi Christian Mobilizers.5 
Hussein addressed a meeting for which invitations were sent 
by a Yorkville hate-monger who had been sentenced to the 
workhouse for participating in a meeting "tending towards a 
breach of the peace." Another speaker was Ernest F. Elmhurst, 
a veteran hand at the Nazi hate game, once indicted for sub- 
versive activities.6 Thus, before leaving our hospitable shores, 
Hussein made his bow to some of our more distinguished cit- 
izens. 
Shortly before he departed Hu ssein staged a banquet at the 
Hotel Commodore in New York . Katibah was toastmaster. 
Freedman was a speaker.7 Richardson sat across the table from 
a friend of mine who later file d a detailed report of the pro- 
ceedings. Hart was absent, but in the assortment of bigots 
and others was a surprising guest—Faris Bey el Khouri, leader 
of the Syrian delegation to the United Nations. The gathering 
was also honored by the presence of none other than the 
Mufti's political cohort, Azzam Pasha, to whom Captain 
Gordon-Canning referred me as his friend. Azzam Pasha 
praised Hussein as "a great leader, one who speaks from the 
heart." He added that he was delighted to have met "real 
Americans, the Americans in this room tonight." A weird note 
was struck by the presence of a tipsy American Army colonel. 
5 In 1943 McWilliams, with 29 others , was charged with conspiracy 
"to establish and aid in the establishmen t of national socialist or fascist forms 
of government in place of the forms of government then existing in the 
United States," and of carrying on "the objectives of said Nazi Party in the 
United States" by means of "a systema tic campaign of propaganda designed 
and intended to undermine the loyalty and morale of the military and naval 
forces. .   . ." 
6 Elmhurst was a defendant in the same trial with McWilliams. After a 
mistrial occasioned by the death of th e judge, the indictment was dismissed. 
7 Freedman, represented by Richardson, testified at a court hearing in 
which a criminal libel complaint wa s sought against the Rev. Henry A. 
Atkinson, chairman of the Advisory Board of the Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi 
League, that he had paid half the bill for the banquet. He also testified that 
he had spent more than $100,000 "of my own money" for pro-Arab adver- 
tisements and other propaganda.  Cairo: The King's Jungle 59 
Loudly, so that even Azzam Pasha heard, the colonel, gnawing 
on a cigar, growled repeatedly: "When we gonna hear some 
real Americans?" 
Armed with these facts as to Hussein's background, one 
morning I went to the headquarters of the Green Shirts to 
see the Arab fuehrer, prepared to claim the friendship of those 
Americans he had met, even though they and I could not be 
farther apart. (CHAPTER III) 
GREEN SHIRTS AND RED FEZZES 
"Our God is the strongest. We are not afraid to die. 
The Jews are cowards because they want to live. The 
Arabs would rather lose ten men than one gun. 
The Jews are the opposite. Th ey want to save their 
lives and lose their guns. That is one difference be- 
tween us." 
Moustafa, Holy Warrior 
THE headquarters of the Green Shirts—more formally known 
as Misr el Fattat, the Young Egypt Party—was a two-storied 
building in the heart of Cairo, with a balcony flanked by 
Greek columns and Arabic grillwork. Passing a high iron 
fence decorated with the crescent of Islam, I entered a court- 
yard. Twin winding stairways led inside. I found Ahmed 
Hussein in his office. 
He was a short, volatile, clean-cut man of about thirty- 
eight, with a round face and a thick brown mustache. He wore 
his tarboosh at a jaunty angle. His features were distinctly 
Semitic and light-complexioned. I introduced myself, told him 
I was a journalist, and explained my mission: "I want to study 
Arab life first-hand." Only Allah could forgive me for the fib 
I added: "I bring you greetings from Katibah and Freedman. 
They ask after your health." 
Hussein's eyes lighted up. "Ahh, my brothers in America. 
How is Richardson?" And he went  on to tell how he had sued Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 61 
the New York Post for libel, a nd lost. ''The Jews have all the 
power," he added. "It is the same in Egypt. When you see 
Richardson tell him that he has a place in my heart, always." 
Hussein's English was almost perfect. 
He ordered demi-tasse, then leaned hack and studied me. 
"May I see your passport?" he asked suddenly. 
"Of course." I congratulated myself on having decided not 
to assume an undercover name. Truth would be my best de- 
fense and confound my enemies. My only fear was that Hus- 
sein might discover that I was also Carlson—he could easily 
ascertain this by writing to his New York friends—and learn 
that I was not only opposed to anti-Semitism, but had also ex- 
posed some of the Arab propaganda flooding our country in 
The Plotters. It would mean the end of my work—and per- 
haps even of me—for Hussein had powerful contacts in the 
government and the police of Cairo, not to mention a dan- 
gerous gestapo of his own. 
"Whom else do you know in New York?" he asked, con- 
tinuing to hold my passport. 
At this moment the door opened, and four police stalked in. 
I nearly upset my coffee as I ro se to my feet with Hussein. 
Two of the troupe wore the black wool uniforms I had come 
to detest; the others were in plain clothes, dressed as nattily as 
our own FBI. Had they managed to trace me here? Had 
Hussein already been warned by cables from Katibah or Freed- 
man? 
Hussein set me at ease. "An hour before you arrived a bomb 
exploded in front of the buildin g," he explained. "The police 
have come to investigate." 
He ordered another round of coffee: good, strong, jet-black, 
bracing stuff, doubly welcome at that moment. The bomb, a 
small one, had gone off in the street. Damage was light. Hus- 
sein suspected the Ikhwan el Muslimin, the Moslem Brother- 
hood, a powerful terrorist group whose headquarters were 
only a block away. The police jotted down testimony, made a 
pretense at looking about the building, and went away. 62 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Hussein and I were again alone. It seemed to me that the 
suspicion evident earlier had now  died down. As we talked 
casually of our mutual impressions of Egypt and the United 
States, I could see that Hussein burned with a passion he 
could scarcely control. He was violently anti-British: "England 
is a senile criminal, a dirty country that pretends to be Egypt's 
friend. England is a bloodsucker that could not be decent even 
if she tried," Hussein declared. His voice rose to an oratorical 
fervor: "The slogan of Misr el Fattat is 'Glory to Egypt!' 
Egypt is the mother of ideas. For four thousand years we have 
given birth to ideas. We want to make Egypt a nation at the 
top of all the nations of the earth! I want to see Egypt greater 
than America, Britain, and Russia!" 
I asked him why the Arabs were so deeply religious. 
"Our religion is a simple one. It needs no interpreters. We 
believe in Allah, Master of the world, who holds in his hand 
the destiny of all people, and of everything. Every piece of 
paper fluttering in the wind is destined to fall at an appointed 
spot. Your visit was pre-des tined. You came here because 
Allah led your steps here. What  you Americans call fatalism 
is the very thing that makes us strong. We do not think for 
ourselves, but place our fate in the hands of Allah. We go 
through fire, and face a bullet without fear because we know 
that Allah wills our destiny. We are not afraid of the future. 
We live today, or die tomorrow. We eat, or not. It is all in 
the hands of Allah. Our mind, our body, our soul, our life, 
everything we are and hope to be, belongs to the Master. We 
are creatures of His will, and ha ve no will of our own over our 
daily actions, or over our destin y. This is what our religion 
and our Prophet teach us!" 
I nodded sympathetically. Hussein looked at me for a mo- 
ment, then got up and locked the door. "I am glad to talk to 
you. I must thank my American brothers for sending you. 
Now an Arab," he resumed, "is affected more by his feelings 
than by reason. He is easy to get along with if you understand 
him. He is ugly if you cross hi m. The Jews have crossed us—  
 64 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
and by the will of Allah that is a blessing in disguise. The 
Jews have brought the Arabs together. We are united. The 
world will respect us when we show our power. After we 
liberate the Arab world from th e English and the Jew, we'll 
liberate the whole Moslem world from imperialism." His 
large brown eyes on fire, Hussein seemed to derive orgiastic 
pleasure from these visions. "Then we will have peace. The 
fire of unity burns in us. A peasant may not be ready to fight 
tomorrow, but he is ready to be killed today. Peasants used to 
mutilate themselves to avoid m ilitary duty. Now they volun- 
teer. They are mad with the joy to die for Allah. As for the 
Zionist Jew . . ." Hussein picked up an issue of Misr el Fat- 
tat, the publication of the Green Shirts, and interpreted to 
me as he read: 
LET OUR MOTTO BE: 
DEATH FOR THE  ZIONISTS EVERYWHERE 
AS  JUST  RETRIBUTION  FOR  THEIR  BARBARISM 
The Zionists are behaving like wild filthy beasts and they 
must therefore be treated as such. . . . Are we to be slaugh- 
tered like sheep by the Zionists and do nothing? We must cut 
their throats as they cut ours. It is our duty to slaughter the 
Zionists in Egypt as just retribution for Zionist atrocities in 
Palestine. We must burn th eir homes and their shops and 
then hold them as hostages and kill ten Zionists every time 
an Arab child or woman in Pa lestine is murdered by the 
Zionist beast. 
I was back the next day—with my camera. As I waited to 
see Hussein, one of his aides listed for me the basic Green 
Shirt principles: "Talk only Arabic. . . . Buy your goods 
from an Egyptian. . . . Wear clothes made in Egypt. . . . 
Eat Egyptian food. . . ." At this moment Hussein sent word 
that he wanted to see me, and I was ushered hastily into his 
office. Half a dozen others were there. I was asked to sit down. 
They stared openly at me, talked among themselves, and then 
to Hussein. He replied heatedly, and turned to me. Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 65 
"Some of our members think you are a Jew. Others think 
you were sent here as a spy. I have told them that you come 
from our brothers in America. You do not know Arabic: a 
good spy would know Arabic. I have also told them that you 
are not an American, but an Armenian. As for me, I say you 
are not a spy." 
"Please tell your friends," I said, "that I am honored to 
have your hospitality, but if you do not wish to grant it 
further, I shall take my leave in peace, and wish you well. I 
am in Egypt to study your way of life, and to write about it. 
If I see good I shall write good things. Instead of spending my 
time at night-clubs, with women, with English propagandists, 
I have come to you for my education." This was the truth. "I 
do not seek your secrets. For my part, my life is as open to 
you as it is to Allah." 
Hussein interpreted my remarks, then turning to me, said: 
"You are the first American who has tried to understand us 
by coming to live among us. You are welcome. We think you 
must have Moslem blood. You do not smoke or drink, or eat 
pork. You think like an Arab, you are beginning to look like 
an Arab, and you already talk like one of us." 
After this I was treated with a certain deference. 
Hussein eyed my camera. "We would like you to take our 
pictures," he said. 
This was what I had hoped for. I took a shot of Hussein 
with a group of his associates, and then we went outside, 
where I photographed him seated proudly at the wheel of his 
green Ford. One of the men in troduced to me as Hassan 
Sobhy, an officer of Misr el Fattat, took me aside. "I am an 
important man around here," he said. "Take a big picture of 
me." I did so. 
Later, back in the headquarters, while I was talking to 
Sobhy, he interrupted the conversation to spread a newspaper 
on the floor and go through the scries of knee-bending after- 
noon prayers. A faithful Moslem is required to pray five times 
a day—the first prayer before sunrise, or if that is not possible, 66 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
at least early in the morning, followed by prayers in early after- 
noon, late afternoon, at sundown, and again an hour after sun- 
set, in each instance accompanied by appropriate obeisances, 
or rak'aa. 
The pictures I took turned out well, and eventually I photo- 
graphed nearly every Green Shirt of importance. As I walked 
in and out of headquarters, al most daily, I was trusted more 
and more. I discovered the Green Shirts had adequate finances 
—from political leaders, sheikhs, and others. A wealthy Cairo 
landowner had sponsored Hussein's trip to the United States. 
The Green Shirts were largely financed by Jew-hating indi- 
viduals and organizations formed to combat Zionism and the 
formation of the new Jewish stat e. According to the April 19, 
1948 issue of Misr el Fattat, former Prime Minister All Maher 
Pasha, who was interned during the war for "reasons relating 
to the safety and security of the State," contributed £200. 
ST. PATRICK'S DAY WITH THE GREEN SHIRTS 
A FEW days later, without explanation, Hussein said: "Be 
sure you are with us tomorrow. Bring your camera." 
Tomorrow was St. Patrick's Day and kismet had willed that 
just that day I was to witness a Green Shirt parade through 
Cairo's streets the like of which no Irishman ever dreamed. 
Early the next afternoon we drove off in Hussein's Ford, 
across one of the bridges spanning the languid Nile, to a large 
open field. Youths in the Green Shirt "Boy Scout" uniforms 
were already lined up with ba nners and trumpets, waiting for 
their fuehrer. Two plainclothes men who suddenly appeared at 
my elbow began to glare at me. I appealed to Hussein. 
"Do not worry, I will explain that you are our official pho- 
tographer," he said. "They will be with you all afternoon." To 
be sure I would have no trouble, he produced a green beret 
carrying the Misr el Fattat insigne, and I wore it. Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 67 
A dust cloud became visible in the distance. A welcoming 
shout went up. It turned out to be a column of soldiers, 
marching with their banners in the wind—a contingent of 
about two hundred volunteers bound for Palestine under Misr 
el Fattat auspices. They were dressed in war-surplus khaki and 
the Arab headpiece—consisting of the flowing white shawl, 
khaffiya, held down around the temples by twin black cords. 
Their faces were bronzed by the Nile sun, their hands bony 
from toil. They were fellaheen —those lowest in the social 
scale, usually tenant-slave farmers or unskilled workers. They 
joined the Green Shirt columns, and together marched past a 
guard of honor of Green Shirt officials. I began to photograph 
the scene with one policeman behind me, the other at my 
side. Suddenly, as the massed banners and flags passed by, a 
dozen Green Shirt arms shot out in the old-fashioned Fascist 
salute. To snap or not to snap! What would the police say? 
Nervously, I took two photographs of the saluting soldiers. 
Nothing happened. 
As the contingents marched toward the Nile, I jumped into 
Hussein's car with Sheikh Mahmoud Abou el Azaayim, a 
wealthy Egyptian who was financ ing the volunteers. We drove 
ahead to Hussein's home on the other side of the bridge. His 
apartment commanded a magnificent view of the Nile, and 
the famous Pyramids of Giza in the distance. 
"Take a picture of my daughters," Hussein said. "I have 
named them Faith and Liberty." Hussein's wife was nowhere 
in evidence, faithful to the Moslem tradition that no decent 
woman ever shows her face to strangers. In his military dress 
and cap, hands on hips, jaw st uck out, Hussein on the balcony 
of his home imitated II Duce. Hussein had neither the girth, 
the stature, the jaw, nor the snarl of the Italian Fascist whom 
he admired and tried to emulate. 
It was now the turn of Sheikh el Azaayim to pose for me. 
In our country, thanks to Hollywood, the word "sheikh" sug- 
gests a virile, handsome son of the desert dashing about on a 
full-blooded Arab charger. Undoubtedly there are some Val- 68 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
entino-like sheikhs. Nearly all I saw were quite the opposite.1 
The sheikh took his place on Hussein's balcony and stood at 
attention, reviewing his troops. Ev en in the glorious Nile sun- 
set that transformed the whole Giza area into magic beauty, 
he appeared to be what he was—one of the ugliest men in 
Egypt. 
He was a stunted man, somewhat over five feet tall, draped 
in a black cape reaching to his ankles. His fez was wound 
around with a creamy white linen fabric so that only the red 
top showed. His beady little eyes, embedded in a sickly, yel- 
low-brown face, looked at me craftily. A scraggly mustache 
covered his upper lip, and a thin beard the nakedness of his 
receding chin. His lips were thick, his ears large. The little 
man showed his full glory when he opened his mouth, reveal- 
ing a set of long, uneven, canine-shaped yellow teeth, and 
sending forth a variety of unpleasant odors. 
But I did not underestimate the sheikh. He was wealthy, 
owning extensive share-cropping lands in El Minya, south of 
Cairo. He claimed descent (more common than our May- 
flower cult) directly from Mohammed, the Prophet. His 
fellaheen believed that he was immortal, and therefore im- 
mune to bullets, and that his touch bestowed upon them a 
similar state of grace. Consequently, not only because of 
Egypt's social laws, but also because of his own exalted per- 
son, Sheikh el Azaayim owned his slaves body and soul. 
Blinded by fanaticism, believi ng themselves bearing charmed 
lives, and hopelessly untrained fo r war, they were now being 
sent by him to slaughter. He called them Followers of Truth. 
"I shall lead them in battle personally," the sheikh ex- 
plained to me through an Egyptian army captain who had 
joined us. Obviously taking no stock in his own immortality, 
or in that of his men, he added: "I will be with them to the 
end. If they fall, others will come. It has so been arranged. If 
1 Sheikh is the title given the headman of a village, or a religious author- 
ity. The title toda y is loosely used. Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 69 
I die, after me my brother, after him my younger brother, and 
so on down the family line until Palestine is liberated." 
As we watched from the balcony, the Followers of Truth 
marched across the bridge in long thin columns, their khaffiyas 
flowing in the wind, their banne rs proclaiming in huge Arabic 
letters: GO AND FIGHT THE JEWS . . . THE ARMY OF ALLAH  
GOING TO FREE  PALESTINE   . . .    I WANT TO COME WITH 
YOU. 
While the two fuehrers stood side by side with me, waving 
from the balcony, the columns marched to Misr el Fattat 
headquarters. 
That St. Patrick's night, I witnessed the weirdest briefing 
session any American could hope to see. Green Shirts and 
Followers of Truth filled the courtyard, so that not even a 
crow could find a resting-place. On the iron fence was a ban- 
ner, reading: THE ARMY OF MOHAMMEDAN GOD . FOR THE LIB - 
ERATION OF PALESTINE . The light from two gas-lamps eerily 
highlighted the bronzed featur es and the white headdress of 
these Nile warriors, as a half dozen orators waited to set off 
the fiery flames of a Holy War. 
From eight o'clock on, for two hours, speaker after speaker 
mesmerized them with the most extraordinary supercharged 
emotional oratory I have heard in ten years of hearing the best 
among our worst Americans. The average Arab is highly emo- 
tional and responds quickly to the rhythm of poetry, and the 
passion of oratory. The Arabic language itself is highly poetic. 
In addition, its repetitious phrases, its changing cadence from 
deep guttural to sustained high-pitched tremolo, conveys a 
deep, earthy, angry explosiveness.  The effect over a period of 
time is overpowering. It seemed to me the words were like 
savage thrusts into the night. They were like flying stilettos 
jabbing at my senses. I understood only a few words—Allah, 
Yahood, Falastine (Palestine), attl, attl (kill, kill), Mujahed 
(Holy Warrior), Jehad (Holy War)—but I felt the impact 
of every word, and the crackli ng thunder of every sentence as 
it ripped and lashed out into the night. 70 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
One speaker was a true firebrand. He was a thin wisp of a 
man, with a small, thin, pointed beard. His long deep-copper- 
colored face glowed with religi ous frenzy. His eyes, long-lashed 
and mystic, were half-shut when he spoke, the lids velvety as 
if touched by purple eye-shadow. He made no gestures and 
scarcely moved even his head. He mixed pure fire with his 
words, and as he spoke he swayed slightly with the fluid 
rhythm of his words, as a cobra sways, at times speaking in a 
kind of hypnotic singsong—half prayer, half chant—then sud- 
denly, his voice as brutal as a mailed fist, he exhorted, de- 
manded, beat with the hammer of his eloquence on the ears 
of his men to fight for Allah and His Prophet. His words were 
like the thunder of a savage symphony, piercing the listeners 
and the darkness beyond, awakening every ear that heard the 
extraordinary virulence of hi s extraordinary passion. . . . 
As he finished, the bowels of the earth seemed to explode. 
The roar that came from the frenzied listeners is utterly un- 
describable to American ears. Th e least I can say is that it was 
like the snarling of volcanic monsters, bloodcurdling, awe- 
some. The white-turbaned faces, roasted under the Nile sun, 
burned with the zealous fire of Islam; wherever I looked men 
stood screaming, shouting, eyes bloodshot, ready at that mo- 
ment to tear out the hearts of their foe with bare hands in the 
name of Allah and the Holy War. 
From the balcony an arm rose high, commanding silence. 
In the hushed moment that followed, a voice crackled: "Ah- 
med Hussein!" 
Hussein was an intense speaker . With powerful gestures 
and deep emotion he reinflamed the religious frenzy of his 
listeners. 
"Death to Palestine's Jews!" he bellowed. 
"Death to Palestine's Jews!" the mob roared back. 
He exhorted them against British occupation of the Suez 
and the Sudan. The mob thundered its approval. As Hussein 
ended with the familiar words, Jehad, attl! attl! the same 
vibrant voice in the rear called out in Arabic: Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 71 
"Hussein, our leader; Hussein, our savior; Hussein, protec- 
tor of Egypt!" 
Once again the monsters thundered into the night, the 
echoes reverberating from Cairo's moon-bathed rooftops. 
The briefing was over. The Holy War was launched. The 
emotional crescendo on which th is rally had ended found 
everyone perspiring, ecstatic, savage, ready to dismember any 
Jew, or bum his home. I could understand now how it was 
possible, after such meetings, fo r inflamed mobs to pour into 
Cairo's Jewish quarter, and smash and destroy Jewish shops. 
Hussein himself had incited a number of such riots on Fri- 
day, the Moslem Sunday, after his prayers. Cairo police with 
black shields and long black whips stopped such riotings— 
after the "patriotic" fury had spent itself. 
MY MEETING WITH MOUSTAFA 
LATER in the night I met Moustafa. He was to remain my 
friend throughout my sojourn with the Arabs, and save me 
from many a dangerous situation. I believe that if I were to 
meet Moustafa today—despite my many references to him, 
some uncomplimentary—he would embrace me as a friend, 
and not thrust a knife in me. 
Moustafa wasn't much to look  at, and my nose usually told 
me when he was near. He was a tall, well-muscled man of 
twenty-eight, with a deep-olive skin, a flat nose and a. long 
upper lip covered with a bristly mustache that always looked 
like an untrimmed hedge. His eyes were like blazing coals, 
even when he was relaxed. He could become savage, as I was 
to witness on the Palestinian front later. The best I can say 
about Moustafa's sex life is th at, although he was fully normal 
in the Western sense, he was also  normal in the Arabic sense. 
Moustafa had the usual vices common to man and soldier. 
What made him unusual were the virtues of loyalty, honesty, 
and a kindliness that he disp layed unfailingly toward me. 72 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I liked this big shaggy soldier the minute I saw him. Though 
his hand played tricks, it was never with my possessions. 
Basically his character was honest and simple, uncorruptcd by 
the greed and venality about hi m. Moustafa never professed 
to be religious: I never saw him kneel in prayer. A one-time 
captain in the Egyptian army, he had been born into a farm- 
ing family of small landowners. They had given him a good 
elementary-school education, an d in addition he could read 
and write English—rare am ong Egyptians. But he was a 
natural-born fighter and detested farm work. When I met him 
he had just returned from an expedition: his next assignment 
—due to come within a few weeks—was to lead the Green 
Shirt contingents and Followers of Truth into Palestine and 
make guerrilla attacks on Jewish outposts. 
I had planned to go later to Palestine by myself; but when 
I heard this news, I made a quick decision. How much better 
to go with Moustafa and his men! How much better to be an 
intimate part of the Arab guerrilla movement, than to go as 
the typical reporter, always the outsider and stranger. I 
broached the subject to Moustafa. "I will come along as your 
photographer," I suggested. A few days later, after we found 
we hit it off well together, he agreed. When he and his men 
would leave for Palestine, I would go with them. 
"I will arrange it with Ahmed Hussein," Moustafa said. 
I quizzed him on his views on Zionism. 
"We are fighting because Palestine is our land and we want 
to die there. Even if all the world helps the Jews we know we 
will win because our God is the strongest. We are not afraid 
to die. The Jews are cowards b ecause they want to live. The 
Arab would rather lose ten men than one gun. The Jews are 
the opposite. They want to save their lives and lose their guns. 
That is one difference between us. Besides, we have plenty of 
money," Moustafa went on. "P lenty of ammunition. Plenty 
of men. We even have a Tiger tank we stole from the British." 
"How did you manage that?" 
"We paid £500 to English soldiers who were riding in the Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 73 
tank. They stopped and went into the bushes where we paid 
them the money. When they came out the tank was gone. 
Don't think we are without friends," Moustafa continued. 
"We have English deserters and Germans fighting with us. 
They make some of our bombs. We also have Czechs and 
Yugoslavs spying for us. They go right into Tel Aviv and tell 
us how things are. They are fine spies." 
At Green Shirt headquarters, Moustafa introduced me to a 
fiery Egyptian who was training the volunteers. His name was 
Izzed-een Abdul Kader. He told  me, Moustafa interpreting, 
that he had once tried to kill Nahas Pasha, now prime minister 
of Egypt, because Nahas opposed the Green Shirts. "They put 
him in jail for that," Moustafa said dolefully, while Izzed-een 
watched me with his little, suspicious, red-rimmed eyes. "He 
is willing to kill anybody who is an enemy of Misr el Fattat. 
He is a very strong patriot." 
"Will he kill me if he thinks I'm your enemy?" I asked 
curiously. 
Moustafa spoke to him, then turned to me and translated 
his reply with a smile: "If he knows you to be a Jew or a spy, 
he will not only kill you, but he will drink your blood." 
With this comforting thought I left Misr el Fattat head- 
quarters for a long night of note-making. I had to arrange 
matters so I could go along to Palestine with Moustafa and 
his men. There were thousands of these volunteers and ad- 
venturers from all the Arab countries, armed and financed by 
pashas, sheikhs, or the Arab League, trained on Egyptian 
army grounds by regular army officers on leave. Their role was 
to harass the Jew, cut off his communications, isolate settle- 
ments, strip and weaken him for the moment, now only a few 
weeks off, when the British woul d leave Palestine and the en- 
tire Arab world would declare a bloody, open season on the 
Jew. Then the regular Arab armies would invade Palestine and 
settle once and for all the im pudent and fantastic Zionist 
dream of a Jewish state on Arab soil. 
Hussein had good news for me a few days later. Delighted 74 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
with my pictures of the parade, and also those of his daughters 
Faith and Liberty, he insisted that I come along to a Green 
Shirt rally to be held at nearby Damanhur. "In 1936 the peo- 
ple there almost killed me b ecause I was anti-British. Now 
they are begging me to come and speak to them. Come and 
see—and bring your camera." 
A GLIMPSE OF NATIVE LIFE 
WE DROVE to Damanhur, a few hours distant, and the trip 
was an education in itself. I saw  graphic evidence of the curses 
that have tortured Egypt since the days of the Pharaohs— 
poverty, ignorance, disease, feudalism. I saw squat, sunbaked 
villages with bleached mud huts, with streams of sewage flow- 
ing into side canals. Swarms of half-naked children, their skin 
covered with running sores, raced in and out of the huts and 
the filth. In the fields, the fella heen worked in back-breaking, 
dawn-to-dark toil for three hundred and fifty-five days of the 
year, with only ten days off for feast days. The mode of living, 
agriculture, and irrigation had changed but little in the last 
five thousand years. Their life e xpectation was less than thirty- 
one years.2 There were seventeen million fellaheen in Egypt 
—surely among the most miserable human beings on earth. 
I saw these wretched subhuman Egyptians digging a ditch: 
they were scooping the earth by hand and throwing it into 
fiber baskets. I saw them irrigating a field: one fellah was 
scooping water from the canal into  an earthen pot, passing it 
to a fellah above him, who poured it into the irrigation ditch. 
I saw a young woman squat along the road and pass her water: 
then she let her skirts fall, and resumed her walk. Men and 
children used the walls of their pathetic homes as public la- 
trines. The nauseating odor of human urine and excrement 
2 According to the World Health Organization report of August  10, 
1949. Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 75 
followed us from Cairo to Damanhur and back. I saw an 
elderly woman walking with a heavy steel rod balanced on her 
head: riding ahead of her on a donkey was her husband. I saw 
a fellah lying in the shade, a monkey neatly picking lice from 
his master's head. As we drove past a train station, we saw 
children who had tied a scrawny dog to the tracks and were 
gleefully awaiting the approaching train. In a land where 
children are beaten and abused, affection for an animal is un- 
heard of, and savagery is the rule of life. 
As I watched this changing yet always horrifying scene, 
Hussein turned to me for a moment. "Well," he said. "Now 
you see a part of Egypt the tourist doesn't see. What do you 
think of all this?" 
I answered honestly. "Frankly, Ahmed, I'm shocked." 
"Only a revolution can change it. The Young Egypt Party 
will do it some day," Hussein said. 
"Insh'allah, my friend, Insh'allah! With God's help!" 
We arrived in Damanhur early in the afternoon, and pro- 
ceeded to a midan, clearing, on one side of which was a 
mosque topped by an extraordinarily lovely minaret. It was 
the hour of prayer, and the muezzin was at his place on the 
tiny balcony. With both hands cupped behind his ears, palms 
to the front and forefingers up, he intoned the call to prayer 
in a deep drawn-out, wailing chan t; "Allah akbar, Allah akbar, 
Allah akbar; ashadu an la ilaha  illa-llah, ashadu anna Muham- 
medarrasulullah. . . . Hayya'alas-sala. Allah is great, Allah is 
great, Allah is great; testify there is no God but Allah and 
Mohammed is his prophet. . . . Come to prayer." 
The Green Shirts were already on hand, with a small army 
of police. Some Green Shirts carried daggers at their belts. 
Others carried long heavy wooden bats. There was a horde of 
bootblacks, and dispensers of purple and yellow fruit drinks, 
serving all comers from two glasses given a token rinse now 
and then in a pail of water. Scores of men were milling about 
a huge tent, made colorful with oriental rugs draped from 
the poles. This was a cool, snug inclosure, festooned with 76 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
flags and lined with chairs a nd benches. A large crowd was 
already seated inside. Within half an hour the tent was 
packed. The audience overflowed upon the midan, with grimy, 
barefooted children dressed in tatters swarming about its 
edges. 
I thought it significant that most of the crowd of about two 
thousand were young people, under forty. A variety of speak- 
ers, ranging from youths to seasoned rabble-rousers, harangued 
them. Two orators ended their speeches with the Fascist 
salute. Hussein, in excellent form, spoke on "The Strength 
of Power." After him—he was applauded and cheered to the 
echo—I heard the poet laureate of Misr el Fattat, a handsome 
man with long, flowing hair. I have never listened to poetry 
recited with more compelling eloquence. I could understand 
only a few words, of course, but I found myself almost as 
moved as his audience. Here was art made universal, and 
translation almost superfluous. Ti me and again he was stopped, 
and compelled to recite entire stanzas over and over. The 
audience listened enraptured, breaking in with shouts of en- 
couragement, or ecstatically moaning: "Allah! Allah!" and 
"Yahya! Yahya! Live on. Live on. May your kind multiply." 
Later I had one of the poems translated: 
I see Palestine thirsty for water. 
I call to it: Come, Palestine, drink with me, 
Because I have a large quantity of water. 
Come Palestine, come Palestine, 
And bring with you your fire— 
To set me on fire. Old iron takes its strength with fire. 
Pour your fire in my heart and breast. 
We are as dust in air. America never cared for us, 
And commanded that all the Jews in the world 
Be collected and placed on our frontier as a flag of victory. 
What are we going to do? 
If we remain asleep, time is lost, and heaven, Green Shirts and Red Fezzes 77 
Which we think makes all things, never works for a lazy man. 
Heaven says: Begin your work, and I continue for you! 
As we drove back, I complimented Hussein on his success. 
"Twelve years ago they nearly killed me in Damanhur," he 
said triumphantly. "Twelve years from now I will come again 
—as the Kemal Ataturk of Egypt." 
Decorum demanded that I say again: "Insh'allah, Insh'- 
allah." (CHAPTER IV) 
THE MOSLEM (BLACK) BROTHERHOOD 
"Ours is the highest ideal, the holiest cause and the 
purest way. Those who criticize us have fed from 
the tables of Europe. They want to live as Europe 
has taught them—to dance, to drink, to revel, to 
mix the sexes openly and in public." 
Sheikh Hassan el Banna 
Supreme Guide, Moslem Brotherhood 
A FEW days later Moustafa l ooked at me and said: "Artour, 
when you first came we thought you were a spy because you 
looked like an American. Now I gaze at your face. I find it is 
as dark as ours. You have a mustache. You dress like us. You 
eat with us. You are one of us, Artour. I can now call you 
akhi, brother." With this Moustafa placed his hand on my 
shoulder affectionately. I had "arrived." 
It delighted me to know this, for it meant I had taken on 
sufficient Arab coloration to a ttempt getting inside the Ikhwan 
el Muslimin—the Moslem (often called the Black) Brother- 
hood1—the ultra-fanatically relig ious Moslem group, which 
even the Green Shirts feared, and which they suspected had 
placed the bomb that exploded in front of their headquarters 
the day I first called on Hussein. The Moslem Brotherhood 
was, in fact, far larger, far more powerful, and far more deadly 
1The American organization called "The Moslem Brotherhood of the 
U.S.A." has no connection with the Ikhwan el Muslimin. My references are 
to the Egyptian organization only. The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 79 
than the Green Shirts. Most of its members wore beards, be- 
cause Mohammed had worn one, and the day after Moustafa 
spoke to me I began to raise a beard in preparation for my ad- 
venture in fanaticism. 
The next week Hussein glared at me angrily when I came 
to see him. 
"Shave off your beard!" he sn apped. "The political police 
will think yon are trying to cha nge your appearance. Besides, 
you are beginning to look like a member of the Ikhwan." The 
Ikhwan, he said, was a curse upon Egypt. "They are dangerous. 
They always look backward. We look forward. Egypt will 
never progress by looking back oveT its shoulder and trying to 
live in yesterday's world." And he added: "I tell you, shave 
it off now if you want to remain with us." 
Ma'alesh! No matter! I shaved off the beard. 
Hussein had nothing but hatred for Sheikh Hassan el 
Banna, the Moorshid, or Supreme Guide of the Ikhwan. 
Hussein spoke of him as the Rasputin of Egypt. They charged 
him with accepting money from the British as well as the 
Communists. They ascribed to him many immoralities, sexual 
and otherwise, as well as violence and intrigues without num- 
ber. And the Ikhwan had no love for the Green Shirts. 
To me this made the challenge all the more intriguing. I 
went ahead with undercover plans to gain the confidence of 
the Ikhwan. This meant keeping the left hand from knowing 
what the right was doing, for Ik hwan headquarters were only 
a short block away. If I were seen there by Hussein's scouts, I'd 
be charged with consorting with the enemy. If Ikhwan prowl- 
ers saw me at Green Shirt headquarters, they would suspect 
me of collaborating with Hussein, whom they considered a 
pro-Western quisling because of his visits to Europe and the 
United States. The Ikhwan ha d its own smear methods. A 
critic or opponent was not called a "Communist" or a "Jew"; 
he was damned as a "European who has eaten the crumbs 
from the tables of Europe." 
I had heard that El Banna had a large following among the 80 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
students of Fouad University. This gave me an idea. Might 
not Gamal be a member—Gamal, one of the two bearded 
students who had followed me the second time I had been 
arrested for taking pictures? I had put his address aside with 
little thought that it would ever be useful. 
I called upon him in one of the native residential sections 
of the city, and he greeted me warmly and ceremoniously. 
"Ahhh, welcome, American friend who loves the Arab cause," 
he intoned. "Allah yaateek el-afiah. Mit ahlan wa sahlan. May 
God grant you good health. Welcome a hundred times." 
"Moutta shakker. Allah yebarek feek. Thank you. May God 
bless you," I said, using the Ar ab phrases Moustafa had been 
teaching me. "I have come to ask your help to meet Sheikh 
Hassan el Banna, who I have heard is a great and noble man. 
I wish to bring the Moorshid the greetings of Americans who 
are one with the Arab cause." 
My hunch was right. Gamal was a member of the Ikhwan. 
He would be happy, he said, to  arrange matters. Would I meet 
him the following night at nine p.m. at Ikhwan headquarters? 
This seemed perfect, for Green Shirt scouts would be less 
likely to see me going there at night. 
The next evening a taxi brought me noisily to a large two- 
story white house, its ornate Moorish architecture etched in 
the moonlight. There was a guardhouse at the corner. A high 
iron fence surrounded the building. All about were dark, 
bearded figures in gallabiyas and others in the garb of El 
Azhar (Moslem Theological Seminary) students. Two uni- 
formed policemen with rifles stood at the entrance. The dim 
light from a corner street-lamp made the square and the 
figures lurking in the shadows an eerie and conspiratorial 
scene. Apparently they were waiting for someone. I wondered 
if they were waiting for me. 
I approached the entrance slowly, with a little uneasiness at 
the pit of my stomach, trying to sense intuitively what my 
eyes could not see. Then I stopped, and waited. One of the 
policemen strolled over to me. For a moment it seemed as if The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 81 
dark, mysterious figures were closing in on all sides. I called 
out sharply in a loud voice: "Gamal houna? Where is Gamal?" 
At the mention of Gamal's na me, the crowd seemed to melt 
away; two men came up to me, ceremoniously led me into 
a courtyard, then up a flight of stairs to a room on the second 
floor. There Gamal waited, with half a dozen other youths, 
all bearded like himself. 
He shook hands cordially. 
"You have made us happy toni ght by your visit," he said, 
and introduced me to the others . They were all fellow students 
at Fouad University. Then he ordered coffee. 
"We know another American. He has written us," one of 
the Arabs said. 
"Maybe I know him," I remarked. "What's his name?" 
The student produced a letter addressed to "Shawa Pasha" 
of the Moslem Brotherhood, and signed by William T. Frary 
of Boston. Beginning "In the name of Allah, the Merciful," 
Frary went on to offer his public-relations services to the 
Ikhwan.2 
2 William T. Frary, 42, was adopted by a woman twice his age, the 
Baroness Adelheid Maria von Blomberg, "daughter of Baron Hugo von 
Blomberg, poet and painter of renown," according to Frary. Frary-von Blom- 
berg achieved some notoriety in 1942 while addressing the Hempstead, Long 
Island, Rotary Club, when he asserted  that "Nazi troops are well disciplined 
and are incapable of committing atrocities." This and other remarks were 
construed as pro-Nazi and aroused Rotary members to protest his talk as 
"German propaganda." 
In a publicity release prepared by himself, the former Boston press 
agent touted himself as a "business executive" and "international relations 
counsel." He claimed to have been pub lic-relations counsel  to the National 
Restaurant Association, the National Fisheries Association, and the Armenian 
National Committee, a defunct adjunct of the Armenian Revolutionary Fed- 
eration. 
He stated he had been "sent on a special mission to the Vatican, Ger- 
many, and London; accompanied Balkan  Investigation Co mmittee in Greece"; 
visited "Arabia as guest of the Saudi-A rabian Government and Aramco . . . 
appointed spokesman for twelve milli on German expellees, honorary member 
Polish Home Army, US delegate for So ciety for Defense of Christianity." 
He claimed to have "conferred" with the Duke of Windsor, General Franco, 
General de Gaulle, Chancellor Figl of  Austria, and Marshal Mannerheim of 
Finland.  82 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"He was here; he knows the Arab subject very well," the 
Arab said. 
I was ruminating on what a small world this was after all, 
when I was asked if I knew "Sheikh Lutz." The name was 
strangely familiar. 
"I once met an American in California who became a 
Moslem," I said. "Could it be . . ." 
"The very same. His name wa s Lutz. We gave him a Mos- 
lem name—Sheikh Abdur Rahman Lutz. He is a Moslem 
Brother."3 
I had met Edward Abdur Rahman Lutz in San Francisco. 
He was a burly man with an innocent face, a former Sunday- 
school teacher in a Congregational church. He had become 
impressed with "the compassion, the charity of the true Mos- 
lem," while working with an oil company in Saudi Arabia, 
and became a convert to Mohammedanism. He hoped to 
found a mosque in Sacramento. In the name of "God, the 
Merciful, the Compassionate," he was also out to collect ten 
million dollars to establish an Islamic university; he told me 
he also made suggestions to va rious Arab embassies to improve 
their public relations. 
By the time I was ready to leave the students I had made 
such progress that it was agreed that I should have the privi- 
lege of meeting the Moorshid himself the next day. Gamal 
meanwhile explained that the Ikhwan had 350,000 members 
and 1,500 branches in Egypt alone. He estimated there were 
an additional 150,000 members outside Egypt. 
"We believe only in the teach ings and the ways of the 
Koran," Gamal explained. "All tr uth is in the Koran. We be- 
lieve the Arab nations have fa iled to win their independence 
because they have fallen from the teachings of the Koran. All 
that is modern goes against the Koran and is therefore dan- 
gerous to Egypt." 
The next day, although I showed up at the appointed time, 
3 It must not be assumed that Lutz necessarily shared the political views 
or condoned the terrorist practices of the Ikhwan. The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 83 
neither Gamal nor EI Banna appeared. I was disappointed, but 
was not too put out, for most Arabs are rather careless about 
keeping appointments. It's not unusual for them to be an hour 
or two late. Fortunately, I found one of the English-speaking 
students whom I had met the night before. 
"Assalamu aleikum," he said. "Peace be upon you." 
"Wa aleikum salam," I answered. "And upon you peace." 
I made myself at home in a large reception room in order 
to study the faces about me. It was an interesting if not en- 
tirely comforting sight. I was surrounded by what were un- 
doubtedly some of Egypt's most vicious thugs, who were 
studying me with as much grim interest as I was them. Here 
were zealots of every description—ultra-nationalist, ultra- 
religionist, ultra-fanatic Mosl ems who had vowed to make 
every day a day of Jehad against nonbelievers. From every 
Arab country, from North Africa to Pakistan, they were flow- 
ing into the Cairo headquarters: Arab trigger-men carrying 
daggers and pistols; men from the Sudan with their cheeks 
slashed; fighters from the Sinai desert; recruiters from Pales- 
tine; gun-runners; spies; lice-ridden Bedouins from everywhere. 
Greasy, bearded men with diseased eyes and mutilated faces, 
crude and barbaric, all sat sullenly, sizing up the Amrikani. 
The fires of fanaticism had consumed them deeply, and the 
flames had burned out all warm th and humanity from their 
faces. They said nothing—only sat there in sullen silence in 
my presence. The most antiforeign, murderous crew in Egypt, 
to whom nothing counted but the Koran, the sword of Islam, 
and the dictates of their Moorshid. Compared to these, it 
seemed to me, Hussein's Green Shirt legions were cherubic 
angels. 
"MY MEN WILL TEACH YOU TO KILL" 
SEATED next to me was a fiercely mustachioed giant of a 
man, with a face bronzed by the desert sun, his eyes fearless 84 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
and hawklike. I could tell by his gray turban and flowing, gray- 
black burnous that he was a Bedouin from the desert, and at 
the same time a sheikh of El Azhar. I had caught a glimpse of 
him the previous night. Now he was whiling away his time 
by toying with the sibha, a stri ng of large oval amber beads, 
used by the Arabs to count their prayers and also to work off 
nervous energy. Fascinated, I watched his enormous hands, 
capable of choking a throat as eas ily as crushing an egg, as he 
endlessly slipped bead after bead through his fingers. He put 
away the beads and dug his hand deep into the folds of a 
pocket inside the voluminous burnous. It emerged with a 
handful of heavy-caliber bullets. His other hand dipped, and 
came out clutching a Belgian automatic. He placed this in 
his lap and patted it fondly. 
"Allah! I paid £20 for this, and I won't have my money's 
worth until I have killed twenty Jews. One pound, one Jew." 
This pleasant observation was translated for me by another 
neighbor, a police lieutenant who had replaced my student 
friend. I suspected he had taken a seat near me to watch me 
more closely, and I played my hand accordingly. 
"How many have you killed so far?" I asked the Bedouin. 
"With my rifle, four. With the knife, two." He held up his 
fingers each time. "That is not enough in the si ght of Allah. 
I have come to Cairo to buy heavy arms. With these we shall 
have a blood feast." He apparently took a fancy to me. "You 
are the first American I have liked," he said. "You do not dis- 
play Western manners. You do not have superior ways. I feel 
toward you as a brother. You talk like an Arab. Allah, you look 
like an Arab. I want you to visit me in the Negev," he said 
quite suddenly. He was evidently in earnest, because he gave 
me his name, which I carefully copied down—Sheikh Younis 
Hussein Mohammed—and detailed instructions for reaching 
his desert stronghold, near Falouja, above the Palestine-Egyp- 
tain border. Leaning over, he asked what kind of gun I carried. 
"I shoot only with my cameras," I said. "I need no guns." 
"You are a brave American, but not a wise one," Sheikh  
 86 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Mohammed said. "Visit me, and my men will teach you to 
kill." 
"You will be afraid to go," the police lieutenant put in. 
"You will have fear of the Jews." 
"I have no fears," I said. "I have faith, just as you have 
faith in Allah. With Allah at my  side I have passed many dan- 
gers. Soon I shall leave with many volunteer fighters for the 
Jehad in Palestine. I shall stay until all Palestine is liberated 
from the Zionist Jews." 
"Those are beautiful words," the sheikh said, after they had 
been translated loudly not only to him but to the entire grim 
audience about me. 
"I fear but one thing," I went on, pressing my advantage, 
"to do evil against my fellow man—to steal, to lie, to cheat. 
These I will not do, for I believe them to be sinful in the 
sight of Allah, and an invitation for just retribution upon my 
head. To do good to my brother and expose the evil in man 
—those are my missions in life." 
"Those are the very words of  the Koran." The lieutenant 
looked at me entranced. My effusions were duly translated, 
to the grunting satisfaction of those present, as indicated by 
repeated murmurs of "Allah! Allah!" I had told the lieutenant 
I was a writer of books. He asked me what kind of books. 
"Political books against the Jew," I said. This also he 
hastened to translate. 
"I shall be honored to have a copy," he said. "I am a very 
deep Moslem. I believe very deeply in the Koran." 
"I shall send you a copy of my next book," I said. "I will 
write of the virile qualities of the Arab, the justness of his 
cause, his manliness in battle." I di d not hesitate to be lavish: 
this was no time or place to be subtle. 
"Hallet el-baraka. Hallet el-bar aka! the police lieutenant said 
over and over. "What a blessing from Allah. The blessing has 
truly descended!" 
"El-baraka aleikum," I responded, raising my eyes to heaven. 
"The blessing be on you." I was learning Arab ways. The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 87 
I decided to leave on this pleasant note, lest I overplay my 
hand. As I stood up, half the room rose in respect to the 
American who looked, talked, and thought like an Arab. 
Solemnly I shook hands with my new-found friends, the 
lieutenant and the sheikh, and renewed my pledge to visit 
the latter in the desert. The lieutenant gave me his address and 
telephone number and vowed to get me out of any trouble I 
might find myself in. 
As I kept visiting Ikhwan headquarters, it became increas- 
ingly difficult to enter the building inconspicuously, and my 
fear grew of detection by the Green Shirts, only a block away. 
I made it a point to keep away from Ahmed Hussein and the 
members (though I telephoned frequently) until I had fin- 
ished my investigations of the Ikhwan. 
My fame spread to such an extent that on succeeding days 
I was allowed to use my camera and to speak freely to anyone 
I wished at Ikhwan headquarters—privileges surely never be- 
fore accorded to a non-Moslem. I walked in and out of the 
building, picking up items of information and piecing them 
together. I had not yet met the Moorshid. But I met other 
memorable characters. Among them was a thug who said 
gloatingly to me, pointing to a new automatic he had just 
bought: "This is for the Jew in battle. But this,"—pointing 
to a dagger—"is for the Jew in Cairo." 
Another was Mahmoud Bey Labib, chief recruiting officer 
and trainer of Ikhwan volunteer fighters, who had lived in 
Germany for a while. Labib Bey was disappointed that I did 
not speak German fluently. He  knew English, but had taken 
an oath not to speak it "until the last Englishman has left 
Egyptian soil," he told me through an interpreter. "I am 
against everything British, a nd that includes their cursed 
tongue. If I say one word in English by mistake, I must wash 
my mouth till every trace disappears." 
Labib Bey was square-faced, surl y, and apparently angry at 
the world as well as himself. He always appeared in a trench 
coat and carried leather gloves, after the fashion of the Nazi 88 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
bully-boys in Germany. "Everything in Germany was fine be- 
fore they were defeated—and it took the whole world to de- 
feat them. Everything the Nazis made was good, like that 
camera you have." He added: "O ur boys believe that by fight- 
ing the Jew they will make a place for themselves in paradise. 
We will not leave Palestine until the last Zionist Jew is 
silenced." 
Like the Green Shirts, the Moslem Brotherhood also had its 
volunteer fighters. Labib Bey told me there were at least 
twenty thousand. Ikhwan el Muslimin, the Brotherhood news- 
paper, described how one Palestine-bound contingent had 
fared: 
Last Sunday was one of Allah's days in Port Said, for at one 
o'clock in the morning there arrived the Cairo train filled with 
people going to fight in the Ho ly War of Palestine. These 
faithful believers jumped on to the platform in Port Said, each 
carrying his own belongings, and marched in line to the Mos- 
lem Brothers' House as compact as the stones of a building. 
They were enthusiastically and energetically prepared to go on 
their way to the field of action and to fight for Allah. It was 
lovely to hear them singing: "Struggle is our way, and to die 
for Allah our highest ideal," 
There was even a women's unit of the Ikhwan—a rare 
phenomenon in a country where women are relegated mainly 
to the kitchen and the fields. The Moorshid addressed them 
through a screen. Merchants were compelled to contribute 
to the Brotherhoods, often on the threat of reprisals, and 
there seemed to be no stratum of Cairo life that was not in- 
timidated by them. I gained an i nkling of the respect in which 
the Ikhwan was held one afternoon when my cab driver made 
a turn against traffic, and was roundly bawled out by a police- 
man. My driver broke into the rushing torrent of words long 
enough to utter a short sentence. The policeman shut up so 
quickly he almost bit his tongue. He made what appeared to The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 89 
be an apology, saluted me respec tfully, and cleared traffic for 
us. We sped on. 
"What did you say to him?" I asked. 
"I told him you were an important official I was taking to 
the Ikhwan." 
Sheikh Hassan el Banna had powerful contacts in the gov- 
ernment. He received support from the Arab League, from 
wealthy pashas and landowners who opposed Westernization 
because it would bring with it the end of child labor, the pos- 
sible awakening of the fellaheen, and the possible revolt of 
workers who received wages as low as twenty cents a day. To 
workers El Banna preached the urgency of getting "back to 
the Koran," which, he pointed out carefully, made no pro- 
vision for labor unions. 
Several times a week hundreds of students from Fouad Uni- 
versity and El Azhar would gather in the courtyard, and in 
study groups inside the building, to be harangued by the 
Moorshid himself, or by sheikhs  sent specially by the Mufti. 
They preached the doctrine of the Koran in one hand and the 
sword in the other. It became clear to me why the average 
Egyptian worshipped the use of force. Tenor was synonymous 
with power! This was one reason why most Egyptians, re- 
gardless of class or calling, had admired Nazi Germany. It 
helped explain the sensational growth of the Ikhwan el 
Muslimin. Beyond Egypt, El Banna envisaged the union of 
all Moslem countries into a gigantic Islamic power, with him- 
self as caliph—both political and religious leader—of the Mos- 
lem world. The newspaper Ikhwan el Muslimin put it this 
way: 
No justice will be dealt and no peace maintained on earth 
until the rule of the Koran and the bloc of Islam are estab- 
lished. Moslem unity must be established. Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Trans-Jordan, 
Palestine, Saudi-Arabia, Yemen, Egypt, Sudan, Tripoli, Tunis, 90 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Algeria and Morocco all form one bloc, the Moslem bloc, 
which God has promised to gran t victory, saying: "We shall 
grant victory unto the faithful." But this is impossible to reach 
other than through the way of Islam. 
Those who charged that el Banna was also subsidized by 
the British Middle East Office in Cairo declared that it was 
British strategy to keep Egypt divided by political and reli- 
gious strife: Egyptian anti-British feeling would then be lost 
in the growing domestic hubbub. At the same time, these do- 
mestic disturbances would justify keeping British troops in 
Egypt in order to prevent possible revolution. 
The Moorshid maintained espionage squads everywhere. 
He also had a special assassin squad, entrusted with the duty 
of liquidating political opponents.  El Banna resented a ver- 
dict that Judge Ahmed el Khazindar Bey meted out against a 
Moslem Brother, and ordered him liquidated. One of the 
Moorshid's henchmen took care of this assignment, aided by 
an assistant who pumped six bullets into the judge. 
Under public pressure Cairo's police chief staged a few 
raids and made a few arrests. El Banna was annoyed. He 
ordered his terror squad to "teach the police chief a lesson." 
The latter was promptly killed by a hand grenade while on a 
tour of inspection of Fouad University. When the president 
of Fouad complained, he was denounced as a "European," 
publicly insulted, and narrowly missed being shot. 
EI Banna played for high stakes. Not content with liqui- 
dating a judge and a police chief, he ordered Abdel Maguid 
Ahmed Hassan, a twenty-three year old student and a mem- 
ber of his terror squad, to carry out his duty to Allah. A re- 
ligious sheikh told Hassan that the Koran sanctioned the 
murder of the "enemies of Islam and of Arabism," whereupon 
Hassan dutifully swore to kill any traitor the Moorshid named. 
Hassan retired and spent his days in meditation, prayer, and 
preparation. On the tenth day after his oath he donned a 
policeman's uniform and went to the Ministry of Interior, The Moslem (Black) Brotherhood 91 
where he waited for the Egyptian prime minister, Mahmoud 
Fahmy el Nokrashy Pasha, to emerge. As soon as Nokrashy 
Pasha appeared, followed by his bodyguard, Abdel whipped 
out a pistol and shot the minister dead, his duty to the Moor- 
shid and to Allah fulfilled, his place in heaven assured. 
I MEET THE MOORSHID 
ALL that I had learned about Hassan el Banna and the un- 
questioned loyalty he inspired in his cutthroats only whetted 
my desire to meet him. It proved more difficult than I ex- 
pected, because of his deep hatred of "Europeans." Finally 
one day, accompanied by my friend Gamal, I walked into 
Ikhwan headquarters for my audience with the Supreme 
Guide. 
He approached us—a short, squat ratty-faced man with 
puffed checks and fleshy nose. He was dressed in European 
clothes—a black pinpoint double-breasted suit—and wore an 
extra tall tarboosh, which gave him the illusion of added 
height. His thin beard, running from ear to ear, crawled up, 
then down his upper lip like an ugly black hirsute vine. His 
manner was mousy and furtive. His eyes, beadlike and deep- 
set, were like two dark slits across his face. We sat in the 
shade, under the shield showing the Koran above a pair of 
crossed swords. 
The Moorshid spoke with a pious look on his face, his head 
bent slightly to the right, hands folded meekly in his lap. I 
disliked him instantly and thoroughly. He was the most loath- 
some man I had yet met in Cairo. Gamal sat next to us and 
faithfully interpreted. 
"The Koran should be Egypt's constitution, for there is no 
law higher than Koranic law," the Moorshid began. "We seek 
to fulfill the lofty, human mess age of Islam which has brought 
happiness and fulfillment to mankind in centuries past. Ours 
is the highest ideal, the holiest cause and the purest way. 92 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Those who criticize us have fe d from the tables of Europe. 
They want to live as Europe has taught them—to dance, to 
drink, to revel, to mix the sexes openly and in public." 
I asked his views on establishing the Caliphate, the com- 
plete merger of Church and State—the Moslem equivalent of 
religious totalitarianism, as in Spain. 
"We want an Arabian United States with a Caliphate at its 
head and every Arab state sub scribing wholeheartedly to the 
laws of the Koran. We must return to the Koran, which 
preaches the good life, which forb ids us to take bribes, to 
cheat, to kill one's brother. The laws of the Koran are suitable 
for all men at all times to the end of the world. This is the day 
and this is the time when th e world needs Islam most." 
I could not help making a mental note that the word 
"Christian" has been similarly used and with similar fanati- 
cism among Western exponents of authoritarianism. 
"We are not eager to have a parliament of the representa- 
tives of the people," the Supreme Guide continued, "or a 
cabinet of ministers, unless such representatives and ministers 
are Koranic Moslems. If we do not find them, then we must 
ourselves serve as the parliament. Allah and the religious coun- 
cils will limit our authority so th at no one has to fear dictator- 
ship. We aim to smash modernis m in government and society. 
In Palestine our first duty as Moslems is to crush Zionism, 
which is Jewish modernism. It is our patriotic duty. The Koran 
commands it." 
He was silent, and then nodded, to indicate the interview 
was over. And with this Gamal and I took leave of Ikhwan's 
Moorshid and Egypt's Rasputin. 
"What do you think of our Moorshid?" Gamal asked. 
"He is a holy man," I said. 
"It is good that you have met him yourself. Now you can 
write the truth." He paused. "You must also visit Fouad Uni- 
versity with me. We are very strong there. You will find it 
very interesting. But we must be careful. They do not like 
journalists. ..." (CHAPTER V) 
BEHIND THE CORRESPONDENTS 
CURTAIN 
"In what other country do you find eighty-five per 
cent of the people illiterate? . . . Education means 
social revolution. They don't want us to think, to 
speak out, or ask questions." 
Students of Fouad University, Cairo 
AT TEN o'clock the next morning I met Gamal at the 
trolley-stop in front of Fouad, Egypt's leading university. To- 
gether we walked toward the entrance. Here stood, side by 
side, a solid phalanx of soldiers of the Royal Egyptian Army, 
each armed with rifle, cartridge belt, metal helmet, and three- 
foot long bamboo staves filled with lead. Behind them were 
arrayed another row of soldiers, armed and carrying extra-long 
(I judged them to be about ten feet) black rawhide whips 
tapering to wired points. There was also an assortment of 
police in the usual black uniforms, and a number of political 
police and plainclothesmen. Every student had to show his 
credentials to the commanding officer, then successively had 
to run the gauntlet of checkpoints to the classrooms. 
I began to understand what Gamal meant when he said: 
"We must be careful." The guards looked at my papers and 
shook their heads. For clearance we had to go to the Agouza 
Police Station, located conven iently near by. A few paces 94 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
away a company of soldiers were  resting, their leather whips 
coiled like black snakes around their feet. Some were chewing 
on sugarcane stalks and listening to an officer reading a news- 
paper. 
"The soldiers are illiterate," Gamal whispered. "Only the 
officers read." 
In the courtyard of the police station were scores of rein- 
forcements, idling. They had guns, black shields, and the ever 
present rawhide whips. We made our way, shunted from one 
room to another, questioned by one police officer after an- 
other, until we reached the majo r police factotum, at the mo- 
ment busy brushing off a fly that was buzzing stickily around 
his head. 
He went through my pedigree with the thoroughness of the 
FBI. Why did I want to visit the university? Because I was 
an American university graduate, I was leaving tomorrow 
(this of course was not true), and wanted to visit the dis- 
tinguished Arabic institution of higher learning whose fame 
had reached America. Surely I would not be denied this 
honor. He made two telephone calls , after which he gave us 
a slip of paper. This permit in hand, we walked toward a back 
entrance, lined mostly with plainclothesmen and a few police. 
The commanding officer called over the biggest man I had 
laid eyes upon in Cairo, an ex traordinarily powerful guard at 
least seven feet tall. This Egyptian Goliath carried a pistol and 
a short whip. With Gamal and me trailing, he led us across 
the beautiful palm-strewn campus, past huddled groups of 
students and watchful detectives, and finally delivered us to 
the mercies of a gang of political police, bristling with re- 
volvers, whips, and handcuffs. After a brief interrogation we 
were finally allowed to enter one of the classroom buildings. 
1 looked at my watch. It was 11.35 a.m. The ordeal had re- 
quired an hour and thirty-five minutes. 
I sat in on a class on civil law. There were about thirty 
students, some wearing fezzes, and all listening to the lecture 
with deep absorption. In the fr ont rows were eight dark-eyed Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 95 
girls. One of them, short and plump, with gold earrings dan- 
gling from pierced lobes, read a paper on "Debts of a Dead 
Man." Class was over at noon. 
"Would you like to meet any of the professors?" Gamal 
asked me. I said no. I wanted to give the police no reason to 
report that an American was agitating among them. Gamal 
left me for a while to seek a friend, and I found myself sur- 
rounded by some of the stude nts—all male—who spoke Eng- 
lish. I told them at the outset that I would not. answer ques- 
tions. I was a "guest of your government," and it would not 
be proper for me to make any comments. 
"It's not a government, it's a dictatorship," one of the boys 
shot back. If I wanted proof, he said, in the 1945 elections, 
the Saadist Party, then in power , had so terrorized the opposi- 
tion, the Wafdist Party—which stood for a progressive type 
of Egyptian nationalism—that the latter had refused to partic- 
ipate. The Saadists had been easily re-elected. "The election 
was a joke. The police had orders to beat anyone suspected of 
wanting to vote against the regime. You can get anybody 
killed or elected here," he said bitterly. "All you need is to 
have money and to know the right officials." 
This seemed bold talk to me, but I found the students with 
whom I spoke, unlike the generally lethargic populace, to be 
alert and socially conscious. They were ashamed of the back- 
wardness of their country, resentful at continued British oc- 
cupation and intrigues, hatefu l of wealthy landowners who 
perpetuated the feudal system, a nd they were constantly de- 
manding drastic social reforms. 
"We've just had another cholera epidemic," one of them 
said angrily. ''More than ten thousand died. Some of your 
American serum saved the rest, for which we thank you. They 
gave a banquet for the minister of health because so few had 
died. That jahsh—donkey—said that he still doesn't know 
how the epidemic began. We can  tell him. It began in our 
own filthy cities." 
"We want you to know the truth." This speaker was a well- 96 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
built young man with burning eyes. "The effendis want to hide 
it from you. We want American advice. We want Marshall 
Plan help, and we want you to help administer it so the people 
will benefit. The effendis do not  want this because they want 
to keep the money for themselves.  This class is not worthy of 
Egypt. It is not worthy of your friendship. You in America, 
turn your eyes to our people. Our people are your only friends." 
"When you go back, tell this to America." Another student 
suddenly spoke up. He quoted from a clipping from a Cairo 
weekly, Roz-el Yusef: " 'Mohammed Barazi Ibrahim, chief 
physician of Fouad University, has reported that only 7.5 per 
cent of his students enjoy full health.' And listen to this: '92.5 
per cent are afflicted with some kind of sickness; 50 per cent 
have chest diseases including tuberculosis; 87 per cent suffer 
from malnutrition; 84 per cent have anemia.' These are col- 
lege students, remember. The common people are much worse 
off." 
The first student said: "Did you ever hear of bilharziasis?" 
The word seemed familiar. Somewhere I had read of a 
grotesque disease, carried by snails, which some of our Ameri- 
can soldiers had contacted during the war by swimming in the 
Nile. 
"That's right," he said, "Do you know that ninety per cent 
of our fellaheen suffer from it most of their lives? It's a liver 
fluke that gets into their systems. They begin passing blood 
and they get used to passing blood all their days. It makes 
them tired, apathetic, unambitious, and always feeling below 
par. That's the curse of Egypt. Disease. Tuberculosis. Hook- 
worm. Trachoma. Malaria. Filth that breeds disease. Poverty 
that leads to filth. And soci al backwardness by our leaders 
who are blind to anything but their own pleasures." 
He spoke with such vehemence that a plainclothesman who 
had been standing at the door of the classroom, eying me, 
sauntered over and growled a question. 
"He wants to know why we are talking to you," one youth Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 97 
translated, "He doesn't think it is proper because you are a 
foreigner." 
"I am only listening. You are talking to me," I said. 
The student who had cited the health statistics tugged at 
my arm. "In what other country do you find eighty-five per 
cent of the people illiterate? People are begging to go to 
school, but there are no schools. There is only money for the 
secret police and the pleasures of  the pashas and officials." 
"Education means social revolution," another put in. "They 
don't want us to think, to speak out, or ask questions." 
"Look at the army they've put in here to silence us. They 
are more afraid of us than of the people," a third said. 
During the discussion I had noticed a young man standing 
by, listening intently but saying nothing. Just as Gamal re- 
turned, the stranger approached me and, speaking excellent 
English, asked: "What is your name, please, and where are 
you staying?" 
If he was an informer, and I refu sed to reply, I was sure he 
would have me followed. On the other hand, by being frank 
I might disarm him. So I gave him my name, and my room 
number at the Continental. 
"I shall visit you at four o'clock today," he said mysteri- 
ously. 
"I shall wait for you," I said. 
As we left, Gamal whispered, "All those boys arc Com- 
munists. They are modernists. They have been contaminated 
by European ideas and corrupted  by the West. They are as 
bad as the Jews. We have had many fights with them." 
I felt I had to make my position clear to Gamal. "I was 
waiting for you when they began to talk to me. I said nothing 
to them." 
Gamal nodded. "It is all right," he said. "But never forget 
—you must be careful all the time." 
We retraced our circuitous way back through the police 
cordons,  reporting at various  checkposts  until  we  finally 98 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
emerged from the grounds. I estimated that there were at 
least five hundred soldiers and assorted police on duty. "Yes," 
said Gamal, "we also have Ikhwan members here. They watch 
not only the students, but also some of the professors. They 
arc just as Communist as the students." 
THE SLUMS OF CAIRO 
THE mysterious student, whom I shall call Yusef, was in the 
lobby of the Continental at exactly four o'clock. He lit the 
cigarette I offered hi m and looked at me. 
"How did you like our university with all those police?" he 
asked. 
I smiled noncommittally. "I hear you are a Communist." 
"In Egypt every reformer is called a Communist," he re- 
plied. He was a clean-cut, attractive young man of about 
twenty-three, with brilliant black eyes, curly hair, and a great 
earnestness about him. He had been jailed twelve times be- 
cause he believed passionately in social reform. "Because I 
think this, I am called a Communist," he said. 
He explained that he believed in neither violence nor armed 
revolution. He was a supporter of Ghandi's methods of "pas- 
sive resistance" and "demonstra tion." He told me the Egyp- 
tian government had sent soldiers  to the university in Febru- 
ary 1946, after more than twenty-five thousand students and 
workers had staged a giant dem onstration against the Saadist 
regime. Seven had been killed and scores wounded in the 
rioting. Numerous professors had been dismissed or trans- 
ferred since then. 
Yusef explained that he represented the "radical young 
generation" that sought to divorce itself from Egyptian ultra- 
conservatism and particularly from the straitjacket of Moslem 
orthodoxy. He rarely attended religious services. "Worship is 
something between God and myself. It is not necessary to Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 99 
make public parades of religion. " He was opposed to Zionism: 
"It is not fair to divide in two a country which was held so 
long by the Arabs. It is the British who caused the trouble by 
making promises to both sides." He believed that Arab women 
should be emancipated, and the veil done away with: "Why 
should not my mother be treated as the equal of my father?" 
This in itself was heretical to a devout Moslem, who con- 
siders woman his inferior. As Yusef pointed out, the native 
woman walks behind her husband, works for him, offers no 
protests when beaten, and must be at his disposal at all times. 
The ideal wife was one who bore male children and served as 
an uncomplaining maid, mistress, and scapegoat. Husband- 
and-wife relationship in the Western sense was largely un- 
known. Romantic courtship and ma rriage for love were rare. 
Equality of the sexes was regarded as "European" and there- 
fore corruptive of the male. It  was difficult for a woman to 
get a divorce. But a man could obtain one simply by proclaim- 
ing three times: "Aleiky el-tahq. On you be the divorce." Re- 
gardless of length of servitude, or illness, or financial status, 
she must leave his bed and board—usually leaving behind all 
the male children, sometimes taking a few of the girls—and 
return to her family. Remarriage was almost impossible, for 
the average Moslem would not take a wife worn out from 
work. The Koran decrees that a Moslem may have four wives 
at one time, as long as he can support them. Most Moslems 
today, however, practice monogamy. Bedouin Sheikh Salman 
el Huzeil married twenty-six wi ves before he died, underbid- 
ding one of his antecedents who had changed wives twenty- 
eight times. 
"Before I am jailed again—this time for talking with a for- 
eign journalist," Yusef said after a while, "I would like to 
show you a bit of the real Egypt—something that most jour- 
nalists never sec. Will you come with me? The place is not far 
from here." 
I agreed. Walking, we saw many sights common to Cairo. 
In the first instance it was a barefooted girl perhaps ten years 100 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
old, dressed in rags. Her individual toes were invisible because 
of grime that had caked all over her—it had even worked its 
way into her matted hair. Her face haunted me. There were 
black blotches on it—and only as she came nearer did I realize 
that these were masses of flies feeding on festering open sores. 
She was holding aloft what seemed to be a doll. Then we saw 
that the doll was actually an infant—perhaps one or two years 
old, probably alive, although we could not see it breathing, or 
hear it cry as babies do when roughly handled. The tiny infant 
was in tatters, one mass of filth from head to toe. Its closed 
lids were slits of raw, inflamed skin, the usual result of tra- 
choma. The girl was now squealing in a shrill voice, hopping 
from one pedestrian to another, begging. 
"Is the baby dead or alive?" I asked Yusef. 
He shrugged his shoulders. "Onl y Allah knows. If it is not 
dead, it will die before long. The garbage wagons pick up 
many of them every morning. The parents have so many chil- 
dren, and are so poor they cannot bury them. . . . Wait!" 
Yusef walked over, gave the girl a few coins. She pinched 
the waif's arm. It let out a thin  wavering wail that sickened me. 
"The girl says it is her sister, and she was born ill." Yusef 
saw the expression on my face. "Wait, you will see worse 
things in a minute." 
A street urchin, carrying a shoe-shine box, accosted me— 
the obvious foreigner. "Imshi!" I said. "Beat it!" The boy 
kept backing up before me, pointing at my shoes insistently. 
"If you don't tip him he will throw liquid polish on you," 
Yusef warned. "I shall hit him. It is the only language he 
understands." 
"Don't," I said. "I won't be bullied, and you won't hit 
him." 
The urchin edged up to me, his brush dripping polish, 
poised to be hurled. As I looked at him coldly, his face 
changed to that of an angered animal. His threat apparently 
worked with most foreigners. He was now both furious and 
frustrated, his teeth bared like those of a dog about to strike. Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 101 
Suddenly I let out a series of oaths in Turkish, Armenian, 
English, and a few I had learned in Arabic, that would have 
reddened a mummy's face. The first salvo apparently terror- 
ized the little bully; the encore sent him scurrying. 
"Yon have learned Arab ways very quickly," Yusef said 
admiringly. 
Except for the boulevards, tourist spots, and wealthy resi- 
dential areas, Cairo is foul and smelly, one of the most un- 
sanitary cities in the world. Dates are sold on the streets, black 
flies swarming on them by the hundreds. I saw native barley 
bread displayed on a tray on the sidewalk, making it easier 
for dust, flies, and finely gr ound horse-dung to settle on it. 
The Egyptian fly enjoys a reputation unique among the pests 
of the world. An especially hardy breed, its ancestry probably 
dating to the time of the Pharaohs, it is almost impossible to 
destroy. It is the best-fed (and least molested) fly in the 
world, thriving on huge piles of rubbish in streets, alleys, and 
on roofs of native dwellings where the refuse of generations 
collects. 
With Yusef I saw a family of four children and their par- 
ents squatting near the gutter, eating a meal of bread and 
fasoulia, cooked marrow-beans. Th e bread rolled to the gutter. 
Ma'alesh, never mind. One of the children picked it up. A 
little further on, we saw an old woman in a black dress selling 
oranges the size of lemons which she displayed on a rag at the 
gutter's edge. Within arm's reach was a steaming manure 
pile. Huddled against the doorway we saw a woman holding 
a filthy infant in her arms, examining his head with near- 
sighted diseased eyes. She paused for a moment, coughed, 
then leaned over and spat. With her fingers, she scooped the 
dirt on the sidewalk to cover her sputum, then went back to 
her lice-picking. I noticed tiny mounds of concealed sputum 
around her. Heaven only knows whether she was tubercular, 
syphilitic, or what. 
A beggar stopped at the fruit stand, pleading for rotted, fly- 
specked dates. He was chased away with a whip, accompanied 102 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
by oaths. He was on crutches, a rag over his head, dressed in a 
patchwork of rags. I caught a glimpse of his face. It was hor- 
ribly pockmarked, and his right eye was a molten grayish ball 
ringed with a perimeter of reddish sores. I turned my head. 
"Have you thought where that beggar or his family might 
live?" Yusef asked. "You will now see. We are almost there." 
We arrived at a section in the heart of Cairo known as 
Aishash el Tourgoman, a typical Egyptian slum. We entered 
a world so completely different from anything I have seen in 
twenty-three years as a reporter that I was numbed by the 
shock. What has horrified you most? Was it the sight of a 
mutilated body, frozen in the grimace of tortured death? Can 
you describe it? Could you bear to look again? If one agonized 
death shocked you, what effect would a dozen, a score, a hun- 
dred such have upon you? 
At Aishash el Tourgoman thousands of agonized men, 
women, and children stared at me in living death. Their 
hovels were built of earth, or of rotted wood creaking on 
tottering foundations. They were dark caves, and the earthen 
floor was lined with dried dung. People slept here, with no 
blanket under or over them. The odor of death and disease 
was everywhere. The "streets"—alleyways from five to ten'feet 
wide—twisted around in a maze so complex that once inside 
a stranger might never find his way out. There were no 
windowpanes, no curtains, no doors, and no electricity. Chil- 
dren huddled about their mothers, too sick or too feeble to 
play. Scrawny chickens, dogs, cats moved in and out of hovels, 
feeding and dropping around the family. On a dungheap with 
a donkey standing as immobile as death itself, dwarfed and 
diseased children moved about. Huge dead rats, as large as 
cats—bloody and mangled in death, their huge tails curling 
around them like the whips of Egyptian police—lay tossed 
and decaying on garbage heaps. Healthy green-black flies, 
mosquitoes, and other insects filled the air, clung to your skin 
like glue, or buzzed away in giant swarms carrying the diseases 
of death. For generations th ese men and women of Cairo had Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 103 
lived this life—each generation adding its contribution of filth 
to the common store. 
If you go to Cairo, remember Aishash el Tourgoman! A 
guide won't take you. Officials will shunt you away. They will 
tell you I am lying. Get a friend like Yusef, one who loves his 
country to the extent of risking jail time and again in the hope 
of banishing the Aishash el Tourgomans from the face of 
Egypt 
These slums beyond slums are not found in the big cities 
alone. Egypt has hundreds of living graveyards to compare 
with Aishash el Tourgoman. The thousands of men. women, 
and children living in this particular district are but a segment 
of the millions who live like them throughout Egypt. No 
Egyptian will deny this to his fellow Egyptian.1 But he will 
deny it to a foreigner, so deep is his guilt in knowing that 
Aishash el Tourgoman is far more typical of Egypt than ate 
the boulevards, hotels, shops, and residential areas that tour- 
ists frequent. The bar of Shcpheard's, the tea tables at Groppis 
(a kind of Egyptian Schrafft's), the lounge of the Semiramis, 
and the elaborate hotels at Luxor are not Egypt! 
Yusef looked at me speculatively. 
"I know another place," he said. "It is worse than this." 
"Thank you," I said. "But I've had enough for one day." 
We parted company and I took  the trolley back to the 
Continental. I asked the Suda nese steward to prepare a hot 
tub bath for me. I soaked and soaped myself thoroughly, gave 
myself a scalding hairwash, and made a complete change of 
clothing. For days thereafter I thought that every itch and 
every sign of fatigue was a souvenir acquired in Aishash el 
Tourgoman. 
1 An exceptionally frank book, candidly revealing the social conditions of 
the Egyptian masses, is The Fellaheen, by Father Henry Habib-Ayrout, S.J., 
published by R. Schindler, Cairo. 104 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I CLIMB A PYRAMID 
FOR the time being I had had enough of the seamy side of 
Cairo. Deciding to see other facets of the city which might 
give me better perspective, I visited the famous mosques and 
the imposing Citadel. I made a tour of the bazaar area. With 
the Armenian I had met at the airport I went to several night- 
clubs. I attended a formal spring ball at Heliopolis, a suburb 
of Cairo, and found the gowns l ovely, but the girls less pretty 
than ours. 
In the Garden City section I ma rveled at the homes, gar- 
dens, and the exceptionally handsome modern architecture. 
I wondered how it was possible for the architects of Egypt to 
live in the twentieth century, wh ile the vast majority of its 
society wallowed in feudalism. Invited by someone from the 
Arab League Office, I had tea at the Gezira Sporting Club, a 
smart gathering-place for the international set, patronized 
mainly by the wealthy, by members of the foreign ministries, 
Europeanizcd Arabs, and expe nsive kept women with faces 
like worn doormats. At the Gezira I was urged not to miss the 
royal museum. But I knew of the glory that was Egypt. I was 
living in modern Egypt—an entirely different world. I was in 
the Middle East to study life, not historical deadwood. 
I picked a bright sunny day when I had no appointments 
scheduled. I boarded a trolley that took me to the Mena 
House, the finest hotel in Cairo, and stepping-off point for 
visits to the Pyramids. I weathered a locust swarm of guides, 
pimps, camel-ride vendors, photographers, shoe-shine boys and 
dragoman-leeches who hurled themselves on me the moment 
I dismounted, and finally chose a young and sturdy Egyptian 
named Khalil. According to the card he thrust in my face, he 
was also "contractor" (whatever that meant) for "Cameles 
and Horsese." 
With him I visited the interior of one of the Pyramids: the Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 105 
stony cavern with its age-long layer of dust and grime was 
neither attractive nor inspiring to me. I paid my respects to 
the Sphinx, took a ride on a camel, and late in the afternoon 
decided to climb the Pyramid of Cheops. At best this is a 
hazardous venture, since the rocks of which the Pyramid is 
built—piled one upon the other. —are huge, and no clear path 
to the top is visible. Few can climb safely without the help of 
an expert guide. One literally signs away his life to his guide. 
I bargained with Khalil as to his fee. He asked for four dollars. 
Since the customary price was one third of that, we settled for 
three dollars—equivalent to the weekly wage of the average 
Egyptian worker—payable on the completion of the journey. 
With Khalil leading the way, we scrambled up from one 
rock to another. The Pyramid's peak is nearly 500 feet from 
the desert floor. As we paused  halfway up, I stole a glance 
backward. I was almost terrified at the trail of jagged rock we 
had come up. At this point there was no railing, no rope, 
nothing to cling to if one became dizzy. One false step—a 
slip—and death waited on the sandstone far below. 
"Let's climb," I said to Khalil. "Standing still makes me 
nervous." 
"Ahh, the Amrikani is making afraid, yes?" 
"Let's go, Khalil. Yallah, Khalil!" 
The ascent seemed to grow steeper. My heart began to 
pound from the exertion. Common sense dictated that we 
pause once more. I avoided looking down again: I was afraid 
of the tricks my imagination might play. We finally reached 
the top. I found it a flat square of stone about twenty feet on 
each side. I would have liked to have my name carved on the 
rock—traditional with tourists who reach the top—but the 
Arab who usually carried out that task had put away his tools, 
his brazier, and charcoal, and was about to leave. 
"I am sorry I cannot even serve you tea," he said. "It is very 
late." 
He left. Khalil and I found ourselves alone on the top of 
the Pharaoh's five-thousand-year-old tomb. Cheops had em- 106 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ployed a hundred thousand fellaheen in relays for three 
months' to build this monument to his name. As the story 
was told me, he even set Hentsen, his daughter, to work— 
selling her honor to help pay the expenses. For sentiment's 
sake, Hentsen's lovers built her a small pyramid next to that 
of her father. With Khalil, I watched the glorious desert sun- 
set, a horizon aflame with gold. Below, to our left, was the 
Mena House. Before us was the palace where King Farouk 
reportedly held notorious wild pa rties. To our right were the 
ancient ruins of Pharaonic tombs.  In the distance, the Sphinx 
looked on impassively, its nose blunted by Napoleon's can- 
non. The panorama of Cairo spread before me. The desert 
stretched to the horizon, br oken only by an occasional house 
or clump of palms. It was truly a majestic and breathtaking 
sight, well worth the trouble to reach the top. 
But what next? The descent worried rac! Even though 
Mother says I was raised on goat's milk, alas, the goat's skill 
at mountain-climbing had never been transmitted! The sun 
had just touched the rim of the horizon and a chill, shifting, 
moody wind, laden with fine sand, swept in from the desert, 
eerie in the sudden, silent way it had sprung up. I took it as 
an omen. 
"Yallah, Khalil," I said. "Let's go. It's getting dark fast!" 
"I want you pay me three dollars now," Khalil said, seated 
comfortably crosslegged before me. 
"That was not our bargain. I pay you when we get down," 
I said firmly. 
"I want money now," Khalil said, refusing to budge. 
"You go to hell, my Arab friend!" 
This caught Khalil by surprise. I had not the slightest idea 
how I'd climb down by myself, but I went boldly to the side 
up which we had come and took the first step. 
"Pay me now half," Khalil suggested, from his sitting posi- 
tion. 
"I give you now American cigarettes. I pay you all when we Behind the Correspondent's Curtain 107 
down," I countered. I left a few cigarettes on the rock, and 
began my perilous descent. 
"Wait!" Khalil called out. "I come." 
I assumed an air of impatience. 
Khalil brushed past me in his skirts, and led the way down. 
I expected the worst from him now, and I was doubly wary. 
First, I waited to make sure we were going the same way we 
came up, lest he maneuver me to an inaccessible part of the 
Pyramid and strand me there for the night. If that was his 
plan, he had chosen the proper moment. All the guides had 
disappeared. There was no soul in sight. We were enveloped 
in heavy silence. Not even a dog barked. Khalil and I were 
utterly alone in the vastness of desert, perched atop Cheops, 
with God as the only witness. Tiny human specks clinging to 
this gigantic masonry, we were invisible even from Mcna 
House, the closest habitation, almost a mile away. Under 
these circumstances, I was also wa ry of a possible "accident." 
A slight push might easily send me crashing down, with no 
witnesses except Khalil to testif y that it was my fault—and 
no witnesses to watch while he picked my corpse later for 
whatever of value I had on me. 
As we worked our way down, every few minutes I would 
pause and yell: "This way is not right, Khalil. You arc taking 
me down wrong. This other way is right." 
We would argue back and forth on the rock, closer to 
heaven than earth, and I would finally follow him. Halfway 
down, Khalil waited till I had caught up. 
"I want three dollars now," he announced. 
I sat down in a corner form ed by two giant rocks, and 
waved him on: 
"Go ahead alone. I stay here. When I come down I pay 
you." 
Khalil looked at me: "You speak Amerikan, but you are not 
Amerikan, yes?" 
I knew what he meant. "Yes and no, Khalil," I said. "I was 108 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
born in America. My mother is a Moslem from Baghdad 
named Maryam. My father is Armenian. I am not American. 
I am Armani. Understand?" It was as bizarre a lie as I could 
think up at the moment, but its effect was magical. 
"Allah! Allah! You half Mu slimin, half Armani. I now 
everything understand. Why you not say before?" 
My alleged ancestry put an end to our East-West misunder- 
standing. He could no longer bully an "Armenian" born of a 
"Moslem mother," so he began to skip down the rocks, tak- 
ing what appeared to be a short cut. Forgetting myself, I be- 
gan to skip gayly after him, never daring to look anywhere but 
the next rock. Down, down, down we skipped, until finally we 
reached the desert floor. 
"Thank God," I said, and sat down exhausted, a physical 
and nervous wreck. I paid off Khalil, gave him the pack of 
cigarettes as baksheesh. "Allah ma'ak," I said, parting friends. 
"God be with you." 
"Allah yittawil omrak," he said. "May God lengthen your 
days." 
As I sat at the foot of Cheops, panting, I could not help 
but believe that God had intervened. I thanked Him again, 
with a silent prayer. After a few minutes rest, I hobbled back 
to the Mena House for a sumptuous dinner. It marked the 
end of my adventure as a tourist—an ordeal I had found more 
dangerous than investigation. 
The next morning, at six as usual, I was awakened by 
Cairo's loudest and most disrespectful donkey. I heaped on 
his invisible head curses in six languages. May he be visited 
by a gnawing pestilence and his bones rot. In the hereafter, 
may he never find a moment's rest, but have crushing loads to 
carry, and a cruel master to whip him on the hour. All these I 
wished upon him and more. (CHAPTER VI) 
WORLD OF THE KORAN: 
ISLAM UBER ALLES 
"We will fight with the devil next time, if necessary. 
We will fight with Russia against both England 
and the United States to achieve our 
independence. 
We will be Communists. We will be anything. . . . 
We will act as Egyptians." 
Saleh Harb Pasha 
Former Egyptian Minister of Defense 
I WAS visiting the headquarters of the Arab League, trying 
to learn the latest news from Palestine, when one of the offi- 
cials called me aside and said: 
"You have become quite a familiar figure around the Arab 
League, haven't you? You fly in and out like a bird. You al- 
ways carry a camera and get around a great deal for a man 
who is in Egypt for just a short visit." 
How he knew that I had put down "short visit" on my 
Egyptian visa application in London, or that I got around, I 
never knew. But I determined to be careful, especially when 
one of his wealthy friends invited me to a party at his desert 
ranch near the Pyramids. One of the princesses of the royal 
family (all were beautiful) had b een invited. Such an event, 
under the dancing stars and alluring Egyptian moon, with 
dark-eyed houris and exotic Oriental music, could add a glit- 110 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
tering page of Arabian Nights adventure to my experiences. 
But I had a girl back home; and the multiple dangers implicit 
in such an arrangement made me cautious, especially when I 
learned that some of the guests were to be British and Arab 
agents. All would be curious about the "American who is 
seeing everybody." 
Instead, I concentrated on Saleh Harb Pasha, former min- 
ister of defense, and now director of Shuban el Mnslimin, the 
Young Moslem Association.1 He was an intimate of Hassan 
el Banna. Although the Shuban was not officially sending 
volunteers to fight the Jews, it was a center of agitation fre- 
quented by Green Shirt, Ikhwan, and Mufti henchmen. 
While minister of defense during the war, Harb Pasha had 
been removed from office, arrested and interned. 
Harb Pasha said to me in English: "If Rommel had won 
we would be independent now. If the Nazis and Fascists had 
won [those were his words, not "Germany and Italy"] they 
would have been friends to the whole Arab world. And," he 
mused, "there would have been no Zionist problem because 
there would have been no Zionist Jews ... or any Jews at 
all left." 
He was a large, brusque man—strong-tempered, volatile, 
with protruding eyes and rocklike jaw of a boxer. He had 
served in the Turkish army in World War I against the Allies 
and later joined the Egyptian army. 
"The English are making a cat's-paw out of you Ameri- 
cans," he went on. "We say in Egypt that the Americans are 
first in science and industry, but children in diplomacy. The 
French say: Cherchez la femme. I say to you that whenever 
there is intrigue in the Arab  world, search for the English 
hand. For sixty-six years we have been her slave. We hate 
Communism because we are Moslems, but a counsel of de- 
spair will carry the day when Britain asks for our help next 
1 It claimed 20,000 members in Cairo, 300 branches in Egypt, and 
250,000 members throughout the world. My references are to the Egyptian 
organization only, and have no bearing on  any group with the same or similar 
name outside Cairo. World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 111 
time. We look on democracy as a myth because imperialism 
is still with us. We will fight with the devil next time, if neces- 
sary. We will fight with Russia against both England and the 
United States to achieve our independence. We will be Com- 
munists. We will be anything. But we will be independent. 
We will act as Egyptians." 
I found this feeling—its genuineness will only be deter- 
mined in a crisis—widespread throughout the Arab world. 
SPIES, COURIERS, AND TRAITORS 
THERE is no doubt in my mind that this hatred for British 
imperialism had much to do with the pro-Axis sympathies of 
most of the Egyptian royal court. Those sympathies were 
known to Allied intelligence early in World War II. Later 
they became a world scandal. Members of Egypt's first family 
were involved in espionage for Italy. In some of King Farouk's 
palaces Italian technicians opera ted radios and relayed intelli- 
gence to Rome. Many of the king's mistresses were Axis 
agents. His palace was a rendezvous for spies, couriers, and 
traitors. During the Nuremberg trials, it was brought out that 
one of Farouk's cousins, Prince Mansour Daud, was provided 
with an apartment and persona l expenses by the German For- 
eign Office (see Chapter XXII). He was reported to have 
broadcast Axis propaganda in Arabic. 
The sensational record of correspondence between Farouk 
and Hitler was revealed in N azi documents discovered after 
the war, and disclosed in a memorandum submitted to the 
United Nations during 1948 by the Nation Associates of 
New York. It showed how Farouk took the initiative in writ- 
ing to Hitler. On April 30, 1941, Hitler replied to Farouk's 
note of April 15, and stated that he would "gladly consider a 
closer co-operation." Hitler asked  Farouk to delegate "an au- 112 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
thorized confidential agent to a third place, like Bucharest or 
Ankara, in order to discuss this co-operation." It was agreed 
that the Mufti should act as an intermediary. 
Outside the palace the orgy of Nazi collaboration was at 
fever pitch. British plans for the defense of strategic Tohruk, 
less than one hundred miles from the Egyptian frontier, which 
had unwisely been communicated to the Egyptian high com- 
mand, were promptly relayed to Nazi intelligence. Tobruk 
fell, a "Rommel victory" traceable to the Egyptian fifth col- 
umn. The Egyptian parliament and press repeated verbatim 
the Nazi propaganda broadcasts by the Mufti and his agents 
from Berlin, Rome, Bari, and Athens. German victories were 
headlined in the Egyptian news papers: "You could tell if the 
Germans or the Allies were winning merely by looking into 
the faces of the Egyptians," a journalist said to me. 
So pronounced was pro-Axis sentiment throughout the Arab 
world that this phrase became common: "Bissama Allah, ala' 
alard Hitler. In heaven Allah, on earth Hitler." 
The spring of 1942 found the Allied cause in North Africa 
nearly doomed, with Rommel only seventy-five miles from 
Alexandria, Egypt's second city. The island of Crete, just 
north of Egypt, was already in Nazi hands. The presence of 
British troops and brilliant c ounterespionage kept Egyptians 
from committing violent acts of sabotage and spreading the 
welcome rug for Rommel. If Egypt fell, one by one the other 
Arab countries (except Trans-Jord an, a virtual British colony) 
would have soon surrendered. Oil from the Middle East 
would have greased the Nazi war machine. The Suez Ca- 
nal would have served the Nazi cause. The resources of the 
Empire would have been cut in two, and Allied Forces 
pinched between Africa and a hostile Arab world. 
The British took drastic action. They forced King Farouk to 
remove Ali Maher Pasha and a ppoint their choice, Moustafa 
el Nahas Pasha, as prime minister. The Axis agents in the king's 
entourage were cleaned out and about 350 important officials 
and members of the royal family were imprisoned or kept un- World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 113 
der house arrest in villas far removed from Cairo. With the 
same broom Prime Minister Ali Maher and his Minister of 
Defense, Saleh Harb Pasha, we re swept into internment. The 
Chief of Staff, Aziz Ali Masri Pasha, was already in custody, 
forced down by the RAF at Almaza Airport with his two aides 
as they were about to flee in an Egyptian military plane. A New 
York Times dispatch reported: "It was believed he might try 
to slip across into Libya, there perhaps to give the Germans the 
benefit of his knowledge of deser t warfare. . . . General Masri 
Pasha is known to and admired by the Germans." 
To be fair, it must be mentioned that a few Egyptian states- 
men consistently urged a declar ation of war against the Axis. 
One of these had been Ahmed Maher Pasha, a distinguished 
member of the Egyptian parliament. Three months before 
V-E Day, Egypt finally declared war against the Axis, in order 
to assure herself a seat at the United Nations. Syria and Leba- 
non followed. Ahmed Maher Pasha was on his way to make 
the announcement in the senate when he was shot dead. The 
assassin was a former member of the Green Shirts who, like 
his king, believed that Hitler could win the war. 
THE NON-EGYPTIAN KING OF EGYPT 
KING FAROUK, the pleasure-loving monarch who has made 
more headlines than any Egyptian ruler since Cleopatra, lives 
and reigns like a Turkish sultan. An alien by blood—the 
founder of the dynasty was Mohammed Ali, a tobacco mer- 
chant of mixed ancestry from Albania—Farouk has as much 
feeling for his people as had the Turkish sultans when they 
reigned over Egypt. 
Farouk rules by paternal terror and heavy bribes. He can 
dismiss a government at will. Though he is cordially hated by 
many Egyptians, he is fawned upon in public. Foreign cor- 
respondents, to say nothing of local journalists, are prohibited 114 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
by law from attacking, criticizing, or referring to the king and 
the royal family unless they submit their writing to a censor 
first. 
There is good reason for this law. Farouk's private life has 
become a public scandal. For nearly a decade, while he was 
married to the beautiful Queen Farida—meaning "the Only 
One"—he committed adultery with women he picked up pub- 
licly. Next to politics the king's promiscuous private life is the 
most discussed public matter in Cairo. It is common knowl- 
edge that he attends Cairo a nd Alexandria night-clubs for 
"pick-ups" to feed an insatiable lust. From many Egyptian 
eyewitnesses I have ascertained that frequently when he sees 
an attractive woman he nods toward her. The royal pimps im- 
mediately get busy. They accost her, bowing, and tell the lady 
it is the king's wish to "dance" with her. Since the king rarely 
dances in public (he is too fat to look courtly), the happy 
event usually takes place in the ki ng's private quarters in con- 
venient sections of Cairo. His willing and unwilling dance 
partners, so reports go, have included Italian belles, English 
society women, and during the war, our own WAC's. 
Any number of things can ha ppen when the escort refuses 
to surrender his girl to Farouk. If he is an Egyptian, he knows 
better than to frustrate the monarch. I have the testimony of 
a friend who swore that he was present at the Auberge des 
Pyramides, a night-club on the outskirts of Cairo, when a non- 
Egyptian girl refused to "dance." Upon the king's orders the 
lights were dimmed, the night-club declared closed, and the 
girl and her escort ordered to get out. In another authenti- 
cated instance, freely discussed in  American circles, the king 
was attracted to a lady escorted by a U. S. Army Major. The 
major told Farouk's pimp "to go to hell." The king, fuming, 
could do nothing without causing an international incident. 
And he did nothing. 
Mussolini and his agents used to debauch Farouk with 
many a skilled Italian Jezebel, thereby helping make more 
secure the Axis's position in the Middle East. It is common World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 115 
talk in Egypt that in 1943 (five years after his marriage) the 
king was driving furiously with two Italian girls and a male 
companion when his car hit a truck near the village of Kas- 
sassein. He spent a month at a British military hospital. It 
was reported he "broke two ribs and sustained serious eye in- 
juries. 
Farouk is fabulously wealthy. His father, Fouad, left him a 
fortune estimated at forty million dollars. Farouk and the 
royal family own about one milli on acres out of the five and 
a half million under cultivation in Egypt. He possesses huge 
villas and palaces throughout Egypt, and several private planes 
for emergency departure. In addition, he receives an annual 
income of half a million dollars from the government. His in- 
vestments, scattered in Switzerland and other countries, re- 
putedly total sixty million dollars. He operates a model farm 
and owns a number of night cl ubs and restaurants in Cairo 
and Alexandria. 
The king lives in constant fear of his life. I saw him one 
day as he was leaving the Cairo Opera. For blocks ahead the 
streets were cleared of all traffic, and the people were kept on 
the sidewalk by police. The ki ng's bright-red Rolls-Royce was 
preceded by motorcycles, an armed truck filled with troops, 
and two bright-red jeeps filled with soldiers and automatic 
rifles. Immediately before and behind his car were black se- 
dans filled with plainclothesmen. No one else in Egypt is 
allowed to paint his car red, the royal color. 
In fairness, it must be pointed out that Farouk is probably 
no better and no worse than most of the members of Egvpt's 
ruling cliques. His personal morals and profligate living are 
patterned after those of the ru ling pashas and effendis, which 
explains their tolerance for him—and, in turn, explains the 
king's hold on them. 116 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
WORLD OF THE KORAN 
AFTER the king, the next most powerful figure in Egypt 
was a solemn-faced, pious man in his seventies, his face dis- 
tinguished but tired. His eyes, too, were tired, and his mouth 
sagged with the weariness of age. But as the rector of El Azhar 
University, Sheikh Mohammed Ma'moun el Shinawi provided 
the sinews for the Holy War against Zionism, just as his pred- 
ecessors had furnished fanatic leaders who fought the Cru- 
saders. I met Sheikh el Shinawi with Aboul Saud, a pleasant, 
English-speaking member of the Arab League Office. Every 
year El Azhar graduated hundreds of missionaries who 
preached its fanatic doctrine throughout Asia, Africa, and 
the islands of the Pacific. Founded in 792, for more than a 
thousand years El Azhar has been the academic shrine, as 
Mecca is the religious shrine, of 240,000,000 Moslems of the 
world. 
Aboul and I walked to the university together. We found 
it in an ancient part of Cairo, surrounded by bazaars and 
native quarters. At the outer gate we left our shoes in charge 
of a doorman, and put on loose oversized straw slippers. The 
Koran requires that those entering a holy place must either 
wash their feet or cover their shoes with undefiled footwear. 
Stepping over a high wooden thresh old, we entered one of the 
courtyards that served the students as classrooms. Hundreds 
of sheikhs-in-the-making were a bout, wearing the small red fez 
and white turban, with ankle-length black robes over lighter 
garments. They were sitting on the matted floors, legs crossed, 
in socks or bare feet, studying, reciting loudly, swaying to the 
rhythm of words, or else being tutored in small study groups 
by the ulema, religious teachers.  They were ardent, intense, 
dark-skinned young men, completely absorbed in their labors. 
I was with Aboul when classes were interrupted for prayers. 
What should I do now? While Aboul went through the ritual World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 117 
of cupping his palms behind his ears, touching the floor with 
his forehead and mumbling his prayers, I faced Mecca on my 
knees, bent forward in a positi on that I hoped would be in- 
terpreted as respectful. When the prayers were over, I straight- 
ened up. This courtesy on my part was not missed by Aboul, 
who treated me with increased cordiality thereafter. 
Though the prophet Mohammed died in A.D. 632, I found 
that at El Azhar his preachments were considered fresh and 
applicable today—with absolutely no modifications. The stu- 
dents I saw seemed to have no c ontact with reality, to recog- 
nize no social problems such as Egypt's seventeen million 
miserable fellaheen. I watched them copy by hand manu- 
scripts in exquisite Arabic script. They pored over the Koran 
to see what Mohammed said about blood transfusion from 
Christian to Moslem. Aboul explained to me that Islam is 
not only an authoritarian relig ion, but also both a political 
creed and a way of life encompassing the sum total of a Mos- 
lem's temporal and spiritual existence. 
"You might describe Mohammedanism as a religious form 
of State Socialism," he said. "The Koran gives the State the 
right to nationalize industry, di stribute land, or expropriate 
property. It grants the ruler of the State unlimited powers, so 
long as he does not go against the Koran. The Koran is our 
personal as well as political constitution." 
After we put on our shoes, we went to arrange a visit with 
the rector himself. In the office of his secretary, I asked one of 
the university officials to what extent El Azhar was helping 
the Arab League. "We are not only backing it, but we are 
leading the cause of the League," he said. "The Jews have op- 
pressed the Arabs. We will permit them to do it no longer. 
Their knife has cut to our bone." 
My audience with Sheikh Shinawi, who spoke in a foggy 
voice, was brief, for we had come without notice. He was wary 
of questions he considered "political," but he did reply when 
I asked him if he was afraid of the inroads of Communism. 
"Islam," he said, "is the rock that will cause Communism 118 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
to recede." Mohammedanism had a powerful hold on the 
Arabs, he explained, because "it penetrates the human being 
without difficulty or mental effort." When I ventured to ask 
him about the role of El Azhar, his answer was one that I 
found difficult to reconcile with what I had seen so far: 
"Moslems from all over the world come to drink from its 
fountain and be enlightened by its radiance. El Azhar has 
been the source of all progressive movements and social 
revivals. El Azhar has shown th e way to all reformers and has 
shown the people their rights." 
Was the sheikh acquainted with the Mufti? 
"Indeed I know him," he said, his eyes brightening momen- 
tarily. "I know him personally and I like him very much." 
We salaamed respectfully, and left. 
It was about this time that I found plastered on the walls 
of Cairo buildings huge, luridly colored posters, violently anti- 
Jewish. One of them, showing a bloodstained dagger with the 
Star of David on its handle, and blood dripping from it, ex- 
horted: "Arm Arabism!" Other posters read: "Don't talk to 
the Jews. . . . Don't do business with them. . . . Kill their 
business and they die. . . . Consider them as our deepest 
enemies." 
A large colored placard, printed in English, Arabic, Spanish, 
French and Italian, showed a sketch that purported to be the 
desecration of a holy relic in Jerusalem by the Jews, and read: 
ZIONISTS ' NEW YEAR PRESENT TO CHRISTENDOM  
The Archbishop of Canterbury, in a recent letter to the 
Times, said he would not entrust the Holy Land to the Zi- 
onists because he was sure they  would lose no time in desecrat- 
ing every relic of the Christ or the Prophet Mohammad to 
be found in the Holy Places. 
The photo of the statue of the Virgin Mary in Ratisbonne 
Church, Jerusalem, battered beyond recognition and thrown World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 119 
on the floor of the church, shows that the Archbishop's ap- 
prehensions were well-founded. His prophecy has come true. 
I was told that this poster was put up by the Arab League. 
Certain committees, posing as "patriotic," either mortgaged 
or bought land from Palestine Arabs, ostensibly to keep it 
from Jewish settlers. Arabs who re fused to sell at low prices 
were branded tools of the Jews, and often murdered. Actually, 
the purpose of these committees was to extend the feudal 
powers of the landowners. I was told: "The Arab who sold his 
land to the Jews against our advice was killed at once. Anyone 
could kill him. No one would know who. The Arab's family 
and the families of other Arab s would know why he had been 
killed." 
THE ARAB DREAM—ISLAM UBER ALLES 
ONE of the Arab League's most eloquent spokesmen was a 
Roman Catholic convert name d Assad Bey Dagher, whom I 
met through Aboul. Assad Bey briefed me at length on the 
League's ultimate aim: the uni fication of the Arab States 
from Gibraltar to Iraq. This would include Spanish and 
French Morocco, Algeria, Lybia, Tunis (these North African 
Moslem countries are collectively known as the Maghreb), 
Sudan, the Arab League States (Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, 
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan), and Palestine, which was repre- 
sented in the League by the Mufti. 
"The Arab world would be like a giant bird, with the 
Maghreb countries comprising the left wing, the Arab States 
the right wing. Egypt would be the body and soul of the Arab 
bird," Assad Bey said to me. "There will be unity, uniform 
laws, the same money system, no customs barriers, and no 
need for passports for Moslems. Each State would have an 
independent tax system and its own army, but the manpower 120 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
and resources of one would be available to the other in all 
emergencies." 
"How about Palestine?" I asked. 
"The idea of Zionism must be uprooted so as never to recur 
in the mind of Jew or non-Jew. Once the Arab world is uni- 
fied there will be no Zionism," Assad Bey said sternly. "Zion- 
ism is an obstacle. It cuts into the right wing of the Arab 
world. How can you have a continuous Arab civilization when 
European Jews set up a foreign nation in your midst?" 
"Would you include Turkey and Persia in your scheme?" 
I asked. 
"Neither Turkey nor Persia is Arab," he answered. 
If the dream should come true, the Arab Empire would 
Stretch in an unbroken chain from the Atlantic to the Arabian 
Sea for four thousand miles. It would boast a population of 
nearly seventy million and cover almost four million square 
miles of strategic territory. It would dominate the Suez Canal, 
Gibraltar, and all the oil and military resources of the area. 
"Would not such a Moslem bloc again try to conquer Eu- 
rope by the sword?" 
"You are misinterpreting history," Assad Bey said coolly. 
"If you had read Islamic history, you would have known that 
Europe was invaded by Turks—not the Arabs. The Arabs 
were never aggressive. The Crusaders and the Zionists have 
been aggressors. They came from Europe to conquer Arab 
lands. Arab history is not well known to the West. The Arab 
religion is missionary. It seeks to expand but not to colonize. 
The Arab is not imperialist." 
"How about the conquest of Spain?" I thought of asking 
Assad Bey. 
What I had heard was the crux and the justification of the 
pan-Arab dream. While it had many obstacles—the chief be- 
ing the Arab himself—the fever burned with intense heat 
among the nationalists. They ha d fired the imagination of 
millions of downtrodden Moslems. Amid their squalor they 
fed on visions of Islam uber all es, and dreamt of better days World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 121 
under a "greater Islam." This—it was becoming obvious to 
me—was the magic carpet that would make the Arabian 
Nights dream of women, song, and rivers of wine—Allah's 
paradise on earth—come true. It was a powerful stimulant 
to anti-Western agitation, regardless of Arab governmental 
changes, for the pan-Arab dr eam transcends all politics. 
And come what may, His Majesty's Middle East Office was 
not only on the ground floor, but was helping in the maneu- 
vers. I saw this on my visit to the Maghreb Office in Cairo, 
established to help the North African Arab States achieve 
their independence from France and Spain. Instead of, as I 
expected, meeting Arabs there, I was welcomed by a sharp- 
nosed, thin-lipped, toothy Englishwoman named Margaret 
Pope, a correspondent of the London Observer. Her com- 
fortable apartment served as the Maghreb Office; her tele- 
phone number was its telephone nu mber. I was served drinks 
and given information in a fashion that assumed I didn't 
know Algeria from Alabama. Throughout Europe and the 
Middle East the Americans, I realized, had built up a remark- 
able reputation for gullibility. 
After Miss Pope had welcomed me, "Slim" appeared from 
somewhere. Slim—no surname given—was a fast-talking 
young man described to me as a Moroccan. He filled the 
propaganda plate. Both he and Miss Pope asserted that Eng- 
land was helping the Arabs ach ieve independence from Span- 
ish imperialism in Algeria and the Moroccos. 
"But isn't England also imperialist?" I ventured. 
"Yes, she has been," Slim ca me back swiftly, in perfect 
English, accent and all. "But she has given independence to 
India and her other former colonies. There is also this differ- 
ence between British and French imperialism. The British 
exploit the country economically. But the French also inter- 
fere with its religion, customs, and education. They seek to 
Frenchify a colony." 
"The French enslave the soul of a people, as well as run dry 
the wealth of their country," Miss Pope added. 122 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"And your view of conditions in other Moslem lands such 
as Spanish Morocco?" I asked. 
"Franco is a beast and a bastard," Slim was carrying the ball 
now while Miss Pope listened approvingly. "Franco rules with 
an iron hand in a Fascist regime," 
Slim had a perfect right to hate colonial exploitation. What 
I resented was the hypocrisy in whitewashing British colonial 
policy. General Clayton's name2 was brought into the pic- 
ture: "He is sometimes asked by the Arab States for advice. 
Most of the Arab League members are his friends," Slim said. 
Clayton was in charge of a special division in the Middle East 
Office "to maintain liaison with Arabs and give economic aid 
and advice." 
A British writer aptly described the Maghreb Office as the 
"North African Nationalists' No. 10 Downing Street." It was 
used as a center of agitation against rival Spanish and French 
interests. As I saw it, once the Moslems had achieved their 
independence, England would slip in by the back door under 
the guise of "advising" the puppet regime it had helped cre- 
ate. Toward this end leaders of the Maghreb countries not 
only received propaganda training by the British, but also sub- 
sidies in money and other aid. Under veiled British direction 
Algerian, Tunisian, and Moro ccan "Committees of Libera- 
tion" were formed. With impe rialist England hated and re- 
viled throughout the Middle East and Asia, England's only 
area of future exploitation lay in Africa. Toward this end the 
Maghreb Office, and similar bodies, worked overtime. 
THE GROWLING LION OF MOROCCO 
BEFORE leaving I had won from Miss Pope and Slim the 
promise that in a day or two I could meet Emir Abd el Krim, 
2 Brig.-Gen. Iltid Nicholl Clayton, then in charge of His Majesty's 
Middle East Office. An influential polic y-maker, he directed intrigue among 
the Arab States, and served as chief of Middle East intelligence. World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 123 
the "Lion of Morocco." This famous leader of the Riff moun- 
tain tribes repulsed the combined  assaults of the French and 
Spanish for six years before he was finally forced to surrender. 
He was then exiled for more than twenty years on Reunion 
Island in the Indian Ocean. Abd el Krim was now in Cairo. 
The story of his "escape" from exile—portrayed as a ro- 
mantic adventure by British writers—was as a matter of cold 
fact the outcome of an anti-French plot hatched in the Magh- 
reb and Middle East Offices . Here's how it happened: 
In May 1947, the French decided to transfer Abd el Krim 
to the Riviera. The French plan was to play him against the 
Sultan of French Morocco, championed by the British. As 
the ship carrying the Riff hero rounded the British protec- 
torate of Aden, British agents informed the Maghreb Office 
in Cairo. The Maghreb puppets sprang into action. They 
clambered on board and urged him to jump ship immedi- 
ately. . . . The Riff leader di d so with his two wives and 
eleven children, asked for a nd was granted immediate asylum 
by King Farouk. No one was surprised except the French. 
The Maghreb Office went into ecstasies. Now His Majesty's 
Middle East Office had another trump card to play against 
its imperialist rival. This was the situation when I met Abd 
el Krim, with Slim serving as the interpreter. 
Abd el Krim was cordial and agreeable. A short, broad- 
shouldered, muscular man of sixty-eight, he was dressed in a 
long white cloak striped with gr ay, pointed Moroccan slippers, 
and a white turban. His face was deeply lined, his nose prom- 
inent, his jaw jutting and covered with a thin gray goatee. 
The ends of his long mustache curled downward. The eyes 
were unusual: living coals, topped by shaggy brows. His eyes 
looked at you fiercely, as if to say: "Don't-try-to-cross-me-or- 
else." Abd el Krim spoke slowly, in a deep rich voice used to 
command. He took the lead by asking the first question. 
"Why," he said casually, "do you in America hate Com- 
munism?" 
"Because it's an authoritarian system that destroys liberty, 124 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
enslaves free men, makes a mockery of justice and democracy." 
"Those are exactly the reasons why we hate imperialism." 
He ripped out the words in explosive Arabic. "It is true that 
most of us are not as well educated as you in the West, but 
the love of freedom is inborn in man. The lowliest peasant 
wants to rule his own destiny. Help us fight imperialism and 
we Arabs will help you fight Communism. I swear to you we 
will honor this pact." 
The impact of his assault, the intensity of delivery, took 
me by surprise. It gave an inkling of the way he had handled 
the Spanish and the French. 
"America is a great and generous country. It means to do 
good. But it has helped Communism by encouraging imper- 
ialism. If Russia, yes, Communist Russia, promises to help 
us achieve independence, we w ill accept that help. We will 
take Russian arms and ammunition, but we will not let her 
in our country." 
I suspected this was easier said than done, but made no 
comment. Instead, I asked: "Are you opposed to British as 
well as Spanish and French imperialism?" 
The Riff leader's right hand went to his cheek in a thought- 
ful pose. I wondered why this arch foe of imperialism did not 
tear off my ear with an immediate blast. 
"We consider British policy as being better than French 
or Spanish. We have seen how England gave freedom to In- 
dia. England is becoming a friend of the Arab world," he 
said through Slim. 
This sounded too much like Slim. The use of the word 
"we" particularly was not typical of Abd el Krim, the desert 
chieftain. I wished I had a way of checking Slim's translation. 
"If England gave you help against the French, would you 
take it?" 
"Yes, by all means." 
Abd el Krim now shifted gr ound and took the offensive 
again. "We cannot understand American policy. Yon have 
helped the Zionists and turned all the Arabs against you. World of the Koran: Islam Uber Alles 125 
Time will show that you are wrong. But," he pointed his fin- 
ger at me, "if you make one more mistake you will turn the 
Maghreb countries against you, as well." 
"What mistake?" I asked. 
"Helping Franco! There is talk of that. Helping Spain will 
only enable Franco to behave more brutally toward us. I hope 
you will not give loans to Spain. I hope you will not send 
military supplies that Spain will use against the Maghreb 
Arabs. I hope you will not make in Spain the mistakes you 
have already made in Palestine." (CHAPTER VII) 
THE MARXIST UNDERGROUND 
"Russia will not fail us. I believe Russia will always 
support any movement which will help the Egyp- 
tian people. . . . But we will not talk of that now. 
. . . The use of force and other tactics will he de- 
cided when the correct time comes'' 
Mahmoud Nabaoui, Egyptian Communist 
EVER since my meeting with the students at Fouad Uni- 
versity whom Gamal had described as Communist, I had 
wanted to sec how the Communist party operated in Egvpt, 
and what it stood for. In such a feudal, primitive, and violent 
land, an inquiry like this was a risky undertaking. But every 
investigation has its undercover approach. 
I met my first nonstudent revolutionary at a secret meeting 
arranged by an Arab newspaperm an who worked for a major 
American news agency in Cairo. Whether he was a member 
of the Marxist underground, I'm not prepared to say. All I 
know is that one day as the shadows of Mohammed Ali 
Mosque deepened over the adjoining native quarter, he pro- 
duced Anwar Kamel. An intense young man, Kamel told me 
he had been jailed six times, first for Stalinist, then for 
Trotskyist activity, in which he was now engaged. He pro- 
vided me with background that I needed. 
"At first men like Sidky Pasha [former pro-English Egyp- The Marxist Underground 127 
tian prime minister] suprcssed the revolutionary movement," 
he began. "Sidky was a kind of Egyptian Mussolini. He had 
one idea—force. But you can't stop Marxism by force, or by 
laws, because its roots go very deep into the misery of the 
people. The Communist movement here really began in 
1939 when students and intellectuals formed a group called 
Art and Freedom. We studied the theory of Communism, 
read Marx and Lenin, receive d literature from London and 
Paris; from America we got the Daily Worker and The Mili- 
tant.1 We also had revolutionary  newspapers from Beirut, 
Damascus, and Baghdad. Nothin g from Russia. It was war- 
time. 
"Two years later Bread and Freedom replaced Art and 
Freedom," Anwar Kamel went on. "This was made up of a 
dynamic group of workers and intellectuals. Five hundred 
people used to come to our meetings. One day sixty of us 
were thrown in jail. We didn't meet in public after that. To- 
day there are hundreds of cells, both Stalinist and Trotskyism 
with five to ten men in each. Some of these cells receive their 
direction from the Democratic Movement for National 
Liberation. Names and leaders always change. They come 
and go. When one disappears another takes his place. But the 
revolutionary movement goes always forward, no matter what 
happens to the leaders. 
"The Communists have lots and lots of money," Kamel 
said emphatically. "I have an idea it comes from Russia and 
is distributed through some satellite embassy. The Commu- 
nists get some Egyptian supporters by buying them off. That 
is the weakness of their movement, Trotskyists are idealist 
revolutionary Marxists. We are strongly organized among 
the workers of the Mattaria Railway, and also among the tex- 
tile workers." 
Strikes were outlawed in Egypt, Kamel told me. Many 
occurred, nonetheless. Although union activity was permitted, 
1 Trotskyist  organ  published  in  New York  by  the  Socialist  Workers 
Party. 128 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
a federation of labor unions w as not. A minimum-wage rule 
granted some five piastres a day—fifteen cents, a sum usually 
paid to child labor. Skilled, organized workers received up to 
about one dollar a day, or less than seven dollars for a 48-hour 
week, to support usually large families. Unorganized labor, 
which was in the great majority, got less—thirty to forty-five 
cents a day, usually, while a policeman earned about $4.50 
weekly, plus whatever graft he could pick up. 
Leaving Kamel, I attempted to contact an avowed Com- 
munist, Fadhi el Ramli of the Socialist Front. No one knew 
where he could be found. After four days of guarded inquiry, 
I ventured to ask someone in the Press Department of the 
Arab League. To my amazement he looked into his address 
book and said: "Ramli's telephone number is 57381." 
I telephoned at once, and spoke with Mrs. Ramli. I finally 
induced her to let me visit her home because of something 
"very important" I had to tell. I found the Ramlis living in 
a poverty-stricken area. Their home was on the second floor 
of an indescribably run-down tenement. The place was almost 
barren of furniture. A frightfully dark hole which I thought 
was a closet turned out to be an Egyptian poor-man's kitch- 
enette—a blackish sink, a dripping faucet, surrounded by rat 
holes. Mrs. Ramli pointed to her son, a chubby little fellow 
having his feet washed in a dishpan. 
"Him name Stalin," she said proudly. 
I had candy with me and gave it to Baby Stalin. To Mrs. 
Ramli I offered Life Savers. If she had not been emancipated, 
I could never have met her face to face in her home. After 
tales of my association with "Henri Vallas, goot demokrat,"2 
and considerable persuasion,  I  convinced  Mrs.  Ramli  to 
2 Unwittingly, but due mainly to his former association with the Pro- 
gressive Party, Henrry Wallace had become acceptable to Communists and 
leftist democrats alike throughout the Middle East. Although I had met Mr. 
Wallace briefly—only once, while he was vice president—I confess, with 
apologies to the well-intentioned Democr at who kept such bad political com- 
pany, that I professed to know him much better than I actually did. The Marxist Underground 129 
telephone her husband. She arra nged for an appointment at 
the American Bar. 
"But how will I recognize your husband?" I asked. 
"Him I tell how you look," she said. "Him come to you in 
American Bar." 
As I was leaving, little Stalin left the dishpan and ran to 
me for more candy. "Go ask your namesake for it," I said. "I 
haven't any more." 
The American Bar proved to be  a crowded cafeteria. As I 
browsed conspicuously just inside the door, a bulky dark- 
haired, dark-featured man approached me. 
"Valias Amerikan?" he said. 
"You Fadhi el Ramli?" I asked. 
"Aywa, aywa, yes, yes," he said, and I followed him to his 
table. Sitting there was a shor t intense Arab named Saleh 
Orabi, editor of Telegraf magazine, in Khartoum in the Sudan. 
He served as translator. 
"The Communists could be the first party in Egypt because 
of the poverty of the masses," Ramli said. "The people listen 
to the Communists but are still afraid of the police. The 
workers are different. They have more courage. Eighty per 
cent of the labor leaders of Egypt are Communist." 
"How do you define a Communist?" I asked. 
"One who is a Marxist and believes in the Marxist revolu- 
tion of workers. I am a Communist." 
How about the "Socialist Front" under which he had (un- 
successfully) run for public offi ce? Oh, that? That, said Ramli, 
was a device used to circumvent a law prohibiting Commu- 
nists from holding office. Ramli was now advocating an 
"armed struggle against British imperialism." He emphasized 
that it was not directed against the Egyptian government. 
"But it has the same effect," Egypt's Communist added. 
"Every circumstance has its technique." 
I asked if he believed violence was inevitable. 130 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"If the reactionary system refuses all reforms, the only way 
to change it is by violence. When I speak of armed struggle 
against the English, it means I am  thinking of guerrilla train- 
ing against a government we will have to fight eventually." 
"How long will it be before violence begins in Egypt?" 
"It depends on the world situation;" Ramli answered. "If 
economic conditions continue to grow worse, it will be sooner 
than if conditions were better. In Egypt the revolution will 
come about 1955. Egyptian feudalism is the best ally for 
Egyptian Communism." 
"What about the Green Shirts and the Ikhwan? What 
role do they play?" 
Ramli shook his head contemptuously- "Hussein and El 
Banna are outright Fascists," he said. "They are one of the 
greatest dangers to Egypt. They confuse the people. They 
talk social reform but they are backed by the pashas and 
clerical reactionaries." 
And our interpreter nodded in agreement. 
". . . IN THE AGE OF FANATICISM" 
THE next man I interviewed had been jailed so many times, 
he told me, that he had lost count. No formal charges had 
ever been lodged against him, nor was he usually brought be- 
fore a judge. Whenever govern ments changed, or whenever 
those in power didn't like what he wrote, police hauled him 
away and he stayed in jail until official tempers cooled off, 
usually in less than a week. Dr. Mohammed Mandour was 
no Communist, but a rugged reformer-editor of Soutul- 
Umma, a liberal newspaper. 
He was a tall, dignified man and spoke excellent English. 
He admired our Constitution and people, but had no love for 
our foreign policy, which he thought aped England's. Dr. 
Mandour had two special hates: the pasha class and the Eng- The Marxist Underground 131 
lish. He claimed that the Eng lish exploited the pashas' fear 
of Communism, and that both toge ther conspired to continue 
oppressing the Egyptian masses. In addition, he thought both 
British and pashas were whipping up anti-Zionist hysteria to 
postpone social reforms. 
"Egypt is not in need of Communism," he said. "We don't 
want Communist help. We need reform from top to bottom, 
not revolution, which brings the dirty bottom to the top. I see 
hope. We will some day have a democracy, a constitutional 
monarchy like Sweden and Holland, where the real power 
rests with the people." 
Dr. Mandour thought for a moment, then continued 
slowly: 
"No people in the world are treated as miserably as our 
masses. A farmer sells his dairy products and vegetables and 
lives principally on cereals. He eats only eleven pounds of 
meat a year. Of about 5,500,000 acres of arable land, 2,000, 
000 belong to 1,500 pashas, including the royal family; 1,500, 
000 acres to some 12,000 landowners; about 500,000 acres are 
held by the Wakf,3 leaving 1,500,000 acres for more than 
3,000,000 felaheen, less than a half acre each. The rest have 
nothing. They work as slave-tena nts. Egypt's wealth is con- 
centrated in less than one per cent of her population. One out 
of every two children dies before he reaches the age of five. 
"Egypt could become the granary of the whole Arab 
world," he went on. "We could feed all our people if we 
used the Nile to irrigate the millions of acres of waste lands. 
Do you know that only three per cent of our country is culti- 
vated? In the matter of poverty the average Egyptian is the 
richest man in the world. The average non-fellah family has 
an income of from $75 to $150 a year. We are in the hands 
of fanatics," Dr. Mandour said, now losing his professorial 
calm. "We are living in the age of fanaticism. Men who are 
3 Religious trusts, in which land is pl aced in the perpetual, tax-exempt 
custody of a religious association that assigns the income for charitable pur- 
poses. The executives are of ten under political control. 132 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
mad about money, power, impe rialism. Men who think only 
of violence, revolution, dictatorship!" 
"RUSSIA WILL NOT FAIL US" 
DR. MANDOUR told me about El Gamaheer, a Communist 
weekly. It was edited by the son of a rich landowner, 
Mahmoud Nabaoui. "His father is influential. The police are 
afraid that keeping him in jail will make a scandal," Dr. 
Mandour said. 
My hunt for Nabaoui led me to the top floor of a tenement. 
I had to sell myself as a Wallace-booster and pro-Communist 
before I was admitted. Once in, I found myself in a room with 
a printing press, and had no di fficulty in convincing a half 
dozen youths that it was important for me to contact 
Mahmoud Nabaoui. El Gamaheer (meaning The People) 
was a lurid affair, with the front and back covers printed in 
red ink, and carrying the usual wild party-line illustrations. 
I met Nabaoui in a cafe, and we sat at a corner table for a 
quiet talk. He was a mousy type, twenty-six years old but look- 
ing younger. He had a short haircut, unusually deep-set eyes. 
"Russia will not fail us," he said in answer to my question. 
"I believe Russia will always support any movement which 
will help the Egyptian people. . . . But we will not talk of 
that now." 
What plans were there for the establishment of popular 
democracy in Egypt? 
"We would like to achieve democracy the right way, by 
agitation," he answered. "The use of force and other tactics 
will be decided when the correct time comes. We cannot tell 
now what we will do." Nabaoui confirmed Ramli's observa- 
tion that the majority of labor organizers were Communist, 
while about fifteen per cent were influential members of 
Ikhwan el Muslimin. "We already have 150,000 industrial The Marxist Underground 133 
workers organized," Nabaoui said. "That is only one tenth of 
the industrial potential." 
Nabaoui told me that the People's Liberation Movement 
had two thousand secret Communist members, meeting in 
cells. There was a Congress of Trade Union Workers, a 
Patriotic Committee for Workers and Students, and a Cul- 
tural and Scientific Associa tion—all underground. "These," 
he explained, "take in most of the progressive workers, stu- 
dents, and intellectuals. We used to have the Popular Uni- 
versity, which taught history, politics, and economics from 
the Marxist point of view, but Sidky Pasha shut it down. 
In 1946 we organized a National Front which brought to- 
gether thousands of members and sympathizers under one 
leadership. Sidky Pasha suppressed this, too, and threw the 
leaders into jail." 
"How are you financed?" I asked. Nabaoui hesitated a 
moment before answering. "My father gives me a monthly 
income. My wife also has means.  EI Gamaheer has a circula- 
tion of ten thousand and the proceeds from each issue just 
about meet expenses. Only two of our workers receive a sal- 
ary—ten dollars a month each." 
"Do you receive any funds from outside sources? From 
other countries?" 
Nabaoui shook his head. "From Russia, never," he said. 
No, not even from Henri Curiel, described to me as a leader 
of the Egyptian Communist movement. He was a myste- 
rious figure who rarely appeared in public. The very fact that 
he was so well known was a sure indication, as far as I was 
concerned, that he was not a top man, but served as a front 
for others. He owned three bookstores and was reputed to 
have become wealthy from them. But in a country with 
eighty-five per cent illiteracy, it was difficult to understand 
how a bookseller could become rich. 
I continued to press Nabaoui. Had Curiel other means of 
support? Nabaoui wouldn't tell. He suggested that I meet 
Curiel by dropping into the most prominent of his bookshops, 134 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the Rond Point. When I went there I found three salesmen, 
all speaking English. I was astonished to see the large stock 
of out-and-out Communist propaganda, in English, French, 
and Arabic. I bought a booklet with a drawing of Lenin on 
the cover; one with a drawing of Marx; and a third on Tito. 
These were in Arabic. I bought The Call of the Russian 
Church, Soviet News, and Russia Today, all printed in Lon- 
don. I also bought New Times, published in Moscow, and an 
old copy of our own Daily Worker! 
Curiel himself was not in. One of the salesmen said that 
Curiel's father would arrive at five o'clock. When I returned 
later, I saw behind the cash register an elderly man wearing 
dark glasses. I went directly to him and stretched out my 
hand. He did not respond. I realized he was blind. I told him 
I wanted to see Henri Curiel. 
"Why do you want to see him? Are you a Communist?" 
If I had said yes, it would have been difficult to live up to 
it when I met his son. If I said no, it might prejudice the old 
man against me, so I replied: "Don't make me answer that 
question now, please. I'll answer directly to Henri." 
It was the correct response because the old man smiled. 
"You will contact Henri through my daughter-in-law," he 
said. "Telephone her at 57270." 
I phoned immediately and talked to the old man's wife, 
who said her daughter-in-law would be in at eight o'clock. 
When I called at eight, I reached the younger woman. Would 
I call back again tomorrow? 
I phoned. I phoned for the next two days and each time 
was politely brushed off both by the young and the older 
Curiels. Finally 1 lost my temper and demanded a showdown. 
Just as angrily, young Mrs. Curiel snapped back: "You have 
talked to Mahmoud Nabaoui. You have asked him many 
questions; you have asked questions about finances. We do 
not know who you are, or why you ask such questions. I will 
try to get someone else to speak to you, but I will have to ask 
my husband first." The Marxist Underground 135 
Frustrated, I appealed to the Arab newspaperman who had 
been my first contact. He knew Curiel and would do his best. 
But Curiel flatly refused to see me. 
Allah must have had a hand in all this, for as it turned out, 
Curiel's refusal saved me from a grave predicament. Two days 
later Cairo newspapers  broke out in headlines: "Police Yester- 
day Discovered the General Headquarters of the Egyptian 
Communist Party." They had raided a tenement on Suleiman 
Pasha street and discovered "extremely important documents 
revealing the address of all the cells and names of the heads 
of the movement throughout the country." Important pa- 
pers also showed "connection between these cells and foreign 
countries." 
Prior to the raid, they had placed the evasive Curiel under 
twenty-four hour surveillance, and trailed him to his secret 
headquarters. He was now in jail. Had I met Curiel, I, too, 
would have been followed, certainly arrested for questioning, 
and would probably have had a taste of Cairo prison life. 
With my police record of cam era forays and my curious 
friendships, I would have b een in a difficult position. 
LIBERATION AT LAST! 
I decided to keep out of sight for a while. I remained in my 
room at the Continental for several days, had my meals 
brought up, and ventured out only at night for a few urgent 
telephone calls I feared to make from the hotel. I telephoned 
Hussein repeatedly. When do we start for Palestine? I de- 
manded. "Any day now," he said. "Wait. Be patient. Be 
patient. This is not America." 
Wait. Wait. Wait. No wonder it was said that an Arab 
spends half his time in waiting, the other half in wishing. I 
determined I could wait no longer.  I would have to revert to 
my original plan and go to Palestine by myself, even though 136 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
such travel now was particularly dangerous. I took the bull 
by the horns and approached the British Embassy for a visa 
to Palestine. It was not easy to obtain, and only after I came 
with a letter recommending me as a "keen and reliable his- 
torian of the present" was I granted it. I was now prepared to 
enter Palestine legally as a newspaperman. 
I made other preparations. I s uggested to Moustafa Momen, 
one of the leaders of the Ikhwan, that he give me a letter of 
introduction vouching for my devotion to the Arab cause. 
It would help me in Palestine, I told him. After some consul- 
tation, Momen wrote the following letter, which was to prove 
extremely valuable to me: 
To Generous Brother El Sayed Safer el Shawa 
Head of the Brotherhood 
Gaza 
Greetings: God's Mercy and Blessings Be with You! 
I present to you Mr .----------- , the American correspondent. He 
has already visited the genera l headquarters of the Brother- 
hood in Cairo and has had an interview with the Supreme 
Guide. He has met Brother Mahmoud Labib Bey, who prom- 
ised he would let him visit the Brotherhood camp in Gaza 
and Khan Younis and take the ne cessary pictures. It is re- 
quested that he be taken to Brother Mahmoud Labib Bey, so 
that he might visit the camp with him. 
God's Mercy and Blessings Be with You! 
From the Green Shirts I obtained an identity card with my 
photograph, in addition to a similar letter signed by Hussein, 
reading: 
The bearer of this is Mr.---------, an American-Armenian pho- 
tographer, who came to Egypt and visited our party, and took 
some pictures to publish in the American magazines. Despite 
the fact that the Arab League had cleared him, we [also] in- 
vestigated his actions, and found that his mission is cultural 
only. . . . He may be permitted to take photographs that the The Marxist Underground 137 
Arab Mujahedeen [Holy Warriors] may think [will] help their 
cause in the world. 
Armed with these letters—one from each of the opposing 
camps—and a card from the Arab League accrediting me as a 
correspondent, an Ikhwan membership button showing the 
Koran and the crossed swords, as well as a green beret and 
armband of the Green Shirts, I felt reasonably safe, I might 
add that I also had a notarized statement certifying my Chris- 
tian religion, and a large butto n showing the Mufti and the 
Arab colors. 
Another stroke of good luck befell me when Hussein Aboul 
Fath, publisher of Al Misri, one of Egypt's leading newspa- 
pers, asked me to serve as a special Palestine correspondent, 
and gave me a letter of introduc tion. With the help of this, 
I obtained a document even more valuable to me: a letter of 
approval from the Mufti's own headquarters, the Arab Higher 
Committee, attesting to my sympathy with the Arab cause. I 
added this endorsement to my growing collection. 
Then, one night at my hotel, I found a message to tele- 
phone Hussein. 
"Tomorrow the boys are leaving! Be ready! Come early!" 
he screamed excitedly. 
I spent a feverish night packing, discarding excess items, 
writing letters and destroying others. I assembled my precious 
notes and film negatives in tightly packed bundles and placed 
false labels on them. I put beside my bed an Arab khaffiya 
that I would wear, and my Green Shirt armband. To hold my 
various credentials, I sewed secret pockets in the nondescript 
khaki uniform I had bought. Just as I had finished listing a 
number of small items I had to buy, the donkey brayed. It 
was tomorrow already. I grinned. I had heard that donkey for 
the last time. 
My liberation came at six o'clock on the morning of March 
31. 
Allah rabim! Allah is indeed merciful! (CHAPTER V I I I )  
OFF FOR THE HOLY WAR! 
"If we Moslems choose to spit on the Jews we could 
drown them. . . . We will crush the microbe of 
Zionism forever. . . . You will see how we fight 
like Allah's own messengers!" 
Arab man-on-the-street 
CAIRO'S mood, the hour before our departure, was one of 
excitement or terror—depending on your religion. Jews were 
imprisoned because they were Zionists, and beaten on streets 
because they were Jews. They huddled in their homes, afraid 
to leave, afraid to worship on the Sabbath because the Ikhwan 
had spread rumors that synag ogues were used for "plotting." 
Newspapers daily whipped up new excitement with news 
from  Palestine:   FIERCE  BATTLE IN  HOLY  CITY 'S  NO -MAN 'S 
LAND.   .   .   .   HAIFA   EXPRESS   BLOWN   UP   AGAIN.   .   .   .   
MARTIAL 
LAW PROCLAIMED . . . . There were celebrations as news of 
the dynamiting of the Jewish Agency building in Jerusalem, 
by a car carrying TNT and "flyin g an American flag," was an- 
nounced, and later when Arabs ambushed a large convoy near 
Bethlehem, seized scores of vehicles, and killed many Jews. 
Under Arab League sponsorship, Fawzy Bey el Kawoukjy 
(who had spent the war years in Germany, marrying there1) 
had begun to attack with his Yarmuk Army of Liberation. 
1 For other details of his stay in Germany, see Chapter XXII. Off for the Holy War! 139 
Arabs everywhere were confident of victory. They gloated 
over their arms, their money, their numbers. "If we Moslems 
choose to spit on the Jews we could drown them," one said 
contemptuously. From another: "We are like a ball of snow. 
We have just begun to roll. We will crush the microbe of 
Zionism forever." 
The Arab Goliath of eight States and forty-five million 
people would win over a tiny, sausage-shaped, "militarily in- 
defensible" area, encircled by Arabs, and containing 650,000 
poorly armed Jews and a fifth column of at least as many 
Arabs. There was no doubt that the Arabs would win easily. 
They said so. 
WE'RE OFF AT LAST 
A TAXI brought me to Green Shirt headquarters early in the 
morning of April 1. It was a scene of wild confusion. Excited 
orders were being shouted every moment. Two telephones 
jangled constantly. I announced  myself to Ahmed Hussein 
and also to Moustafa, who ha d acquired a pistol and a car- 
tridge belt. After this, I waited quietly by the door. Nothing 
in the Arab world, I knew, is done quickly or on time. What- 
ever the Arab's other talents, if there is a complex or a long 
way around, he is likely to take  it instead of the simple and 
efficient way. Then, too, the av erage Arab finds it difficult to 
subordinate his fierce independe nce to the demands of team- 
work. Two instincts: to rebel against an order, or to give one 
himself, clash within him immediately. The result is often 
a great deal of verbal thunder, but little actual accomplish- 
ment. 
And so, I waited patiently for the snowball to start rolling. 
Shortly after noon, Hussein hurried up to me. "Do you have 
your camera?" I patted my hip pocket. "Good," he said. 
"Come with me." 140 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
We hastened to two waiting automobiles. Hussein, his of- 
ficers, Moustafa, Sheikh Azaayim, and I climbed into them, 
and off we went. We arrived at a quarter dense with milling 
natives, the women completely covered, despite the sweltering 
heat, in black clothing, and hordes of sticky children every- 
where. Excitement reigned, with screaming and screeching 
going on everywhere. On the narrow dirt street, a half dozen 
sturdy American-made trucks were lined up. Everybody was 
directing the loading of tins of  gasoline, sacks of flour and 
grain, onions, olives, Vickers machine-guns, and rifles. Dressed 
incongruously in riding breeches, trim American military coat 
(obtainable in Cairo's bazaars for five dollars), and white flow- 
ing headdress, Sheikh Azaayim, leader of the Followers of 
Truth, pitched in and began to direct all the directors—no 
easy job! 
"Artour, Artour!" It was Hussein. "Take pictures. We are 
making history!" 
Catching quicksilver is far easi er than getting Arabs to pose 
naturally for a group photo. The camera must be quicker than 
the Arab, which is impossible! They strut, they simper, they 
push one another to get in the front. Finally they line up like 
a jumbled mass of upright sticks, each in a theatrical pose. I 
took a number of such pictures, with Arabs three layers deep, 
Ahmed Hussein, Sheikh Azaayim and Moustafa in front. . . . 
I confess I was getting to like Moustafa more and more. He 
was a born leader and always seemed to be calm. I kept close 
to him. 
Above the din someone started to yell "Yallah!" It was 
taken up by the Followers of Truth, by the men, the women, 
the children. The native quarters rang with "Yallah!" It's a 
universal Arab phrase, meaning "Let's go!" 
Two hundred of us piled into the trucks. Everybody was 
screaming at the top of his voice. Women leaned out of the 
long-shuttered windows waving ecstatically at us. Then they 
suddenly began emiting shrill tremolo cries, their tongues 
rapidly darting in and out, pa lms clapping their mouths, Off for the Holy War! 141 
American Indian fashion. It is a native custom called zag- 
hareed. An old man with fierce features brandished a thick 
cane and yallah'd us on. The trucks started their grinding 
motors, adding to the racket. And now, like a cacophonous 
orchestra, came the noise of rasping horns, followed by chil- 
dren screaming, and mothers squealing to get them into the 
doorways. The six roaring motors sounded like a squadron of 
B-29's. Clouds of dust swept up, hiding the houses, the 
women, and the children from view. Our send-off was nothing 
short of triumphal. I wondered, fleetingly, if the Followers of 
Truth would return the same way. 
We rode through narrow, twisting streets and then our 
cavalcade of trucks turned into a broad boulevard. Banners 
flying, the Followers of Truth broke into a chant: "We are go- 
ing to fight for Allah, and A llah will protect us from harm." 
They kept it up, word  for word, as we roared toward the heart 
of Cairo, speeded on by deafening cheers from the crowds. We 
stopped all traffic at every intersection. The trucks screeched 
to a halt in a highly congested area. A crowd collected. Men 
broke through to the front and began to deliver impassioned 
speeches. "We want to come with you. . . . Kill them till the 
ground is red. . . . Bring Palestine back with you. . . ." 
"Artour, Artour!" It was Moustafa waving me off the truck. 
"I've been recognized," was my first thought. 
"Hurry up," Moustafa called. "They want you." 
I began clambering down. 
"Hurry, Artour," I felt a violent tugging. "They want you 
to take pictures!" 
I almost hugged Moustafa. ... I saw that we were in 
front of the office of EI Ahram, a Cairo daily. It was dusk. A 
satisfactory photograph would be difficult. I called a chunky 
Follower of Truth, and made hi m bend over to serve as a tri- 
pod. Green Shirters, Followers of Truth, Hussein, Azaayim, a 
policeman, and people off the sidewalk lined up in the usual 
jumble. My reputation as a photographer was at stake. "Hold 
these people still for just one second," I begged Moustafa. 142 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
How he ever did it is a tribute to his genius for command. He 
also went so far as to order the man whose back I was using 
to stop breathing. 
I hastily shot several one-second exposures. I took the film 
into the El Ahram and gave in structions. Eventually I saw 
the printed photograph. To my gratification it came out sur- 
prisingly clear. 
"As our official photographer, you must sit up in front with 
us," Moustafa announced. "Don' t worry about your bags. I 
am in charge of this truck." He spoke to the men on top. They 
carefully covered my luggage with blankets, and one of them 
was held accountable. 
TEA, DRUG, AND HASHEESH 
THE sun had set in a blaze of golden flame and the horizon 
was still glowing. Our trucks rolled past the outskirts of Cairo 
and rumbled into the darkness. I was squeezed in between 
Moustafa and the driver. Behind us the Followers of Truth 
kept up their monotonous, rhythmic chant: "We are going to 
fight for Allah, and Allah will protect us from harm." 
"The Jews are praying too," I said. "To which side will 
Allah listen?" 
"To ours," Moustafa said. "You will sec how we fight like 
Allah's own messengers!" 
Our driver, a plump Bedouin, presently complained that he 
was getting tired. At the next village we stopped in front of a 
"smoke house." It was a dirt-brown little place, serving as a 
restaurant, coffee house, gossip hangout—and something 
more. Fellahs in dirty gallabiyas leaned against the walls, or 
sat on the earthen floor or in crude, straw-bottomed chairs, 
feet dangling, alternately spitting and smoking the nargileh, 
the water-pipe. Others were drinking a syrupy, tar-black tea, 
which acted like a mild narcotic. 
I saw our driver go straight to the proprietor behind a grimy Off for the Holy War! 143 
counter, a deformed man with a closed eye. A few minutes 
later he returned, holding a tiny package of brown paper. He 
kissed it with a loud smacking of  the lips, and carefully put 
it in his inside pocket. We drove on. . . . He was a happy 
man now, humming a tune. 
"Did he drink tea?" I asked Moustafa. 
"No, not tea," he answered mysteriously. 
I could no longer contain my curiosity. "What did he take?" 
"Hasheesh." 
"How often does he use it?" 
"All the time. It keeps him awake, and gives him a feeling 
that he is strong and has no worries." 
"But isn't it habit-forming?" 
Moustafa shrugged his shoulde rs. "He doesn't think about 
it when he takes it." 
Our driver had paid fifty cents for a few grams. 
We drove through the night, haltin g at long intervals to see 
that all the trucks were with us. The chanting had stopped 
now. Under the moonlight the Followers of Truth slept and 
snored on the grain sacks. At one o'clock we arrived in Is- 
mailia, crossing-point of the Suez Canal. Palestine was 140 
miles to the northeast, across the desert sands. Not far from 
here Moses and the Israelites, fleeing from Pharaoh, camped 
before crossing the Red Sea. But this was no time for such 
reflections. We were all weary from the long day and its ex- 
citement, anxious to cross the canal by ferry that very night 
and set up camp in the Sinai D esert. The trucks pulled up un- 
der pine groves that lined the canal. Green Shirts and Fol- 
lowers of Truth got off the trucks, arrayed themselves against 
the trees, the banks, the truck, and relieved themselves. 
The Suez Canal proved our temporary Waterloo. Through 
some technicality, the customs official would not let us 
through. Perhaps everything hadn't yet been tried—a little 
baksheesh, bribe, for instance? Ma'alesh! No matter, it could 
wait until morning. Followers of Truth spread out their 
blankets—on the very places th ey had watered—and pulled 144 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
them over their heads. Shrouded, immobile figures, they lay 
grotesquely along the roadway and in the clump of pines. 
I had no blanket, so I curled up on the driver's seat of our 
truck. The night was cold. I was wearing my nondescript khaki 
uniform and my flowing khaffiya. Unable to sleep, I walked 
to the canal's edge and dipped my fingers into the water. It 
was surprisingly warm under the cold air. I sat down by the 
bank and pulled my knees up to my chest. I stuffed the cuffs 
of my trousers inside my socks and pulled up the socks in an 
attempt to husband as much warmth as possible. I sat there, 
huddled up and shivering. The ferry that would take us over 
tomorrow was moored to the bank on my right. The moon 
kissed the shimmering waters, but its light made the desert 
beyond seem all the more bleached and forbidding. I could 
see the road snaking from the opposite bank and losing itself 
in the bleak Sinai waste. A merchant ship churned slowly up 
the canal, its lights ablaze, moving through the water with a 
soft muffled sound. The waves lapped softly against the shore; 
then all was stillness again. There was only a tiny light gleam- 
ing in the customs office; nothing  in the adjoining tent where 
Sheikh Azaayim slept, apart from his men. Six of his men 
guarded the entrance. In the dimness I could see the others. 
Moustafa, I knew, was somewhere among them. 
I returned to my truck. The hasheesh-drunk driver was 
slumped over the wheel snoring peacefully. I dozed off in fits 
and starts. The cold drove me out again, prowling about for 
warmth. Then the sun broke over the bleached Sinai sands, 
a radiant, blazing sun that brought with its warmth, life, 
hunger. The water and the ferry took shape, and the birds 
began their chirping in the pine grove. It was also time for 
the Followers of Truth to water the roadbanks, en masse. 
Moustafa and I went to the bank and washed in the salt 
water, I loaned him my comb. "Keep it, Moustafa, I have an- 
other one." He was grateful. Almost anything I said or did 
for him evoked his gratitude. 
I noticed now that there were twelve Green Shirt regulars. Off for the Holy War! 145 
(I counted myself among them, as distinguished from the 
Followers of Truth.) We were more Europeanized. Our cloth- 
ing (except mine) was mostly United States army surplus, or 
parts thereof, with Green Sh irt insignia. We didn't chant 
about Allah protecting us from harm. Nearly all spoke some 
English. In addition to Mous tafa, there was Captain Zaki, 
wearing an Egyptian army uniform, who was now "on leave," 
like hundreds of others. There was Sabri, Moustafa's closest 
friend, and Mahmoud, the most dapper amongst us. I found 
myself with these four most of the time. 
"Let's eat," Moustafa said. 
While Captain Zaki and Sheikh Azaayim haggled with the 
customs officials, seven of us climbed a near-by sand dune and 
sat down to breakfast. It consisted of black olives, raw onions, 
and stale kmaj—thin, brownish, round-shaped bread, a half 
inch thick. We spread the food on a newspaper and devoured 
it in record time. Captain Zaki and the sheikh met us with 
long faces. The customs official s were adamant. They had re- 
ceived special orders from the Ministry of Interior not to let 
us through. 
"Is it because I, an American, am with you?" I asked 
Moustafa. 
"No, Artour. There are other reasons. We will camp at 
Ismailia, and sneak into Palestine in small groups. Yallah!" 
"Yallah! Yallah! Yallah!" 
The call served as a bugle cry. Nothing had been unloaded, 
so we clambered into the truc ks, drove through Ismailia's busi- 
ness district, and on to an outlying mud-built village that 
comprised the native quarter. This was to be home for the 
next four days, while we devised plans to steal into Palestine. 
BEHIND THE NATIVE CURTAIN 
FOLLOWERS of Truth encamped on the street, in front of 
a grocery store. The grocer provided them with a huge tent 146 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of Oriental rugs and canopies. While Sheikh Azaayim stayed 
at the home of the grocer, as a distinguished guest, we of the 
Green Shirts—twelve strong—were directed to a building near 
by, where we were jammed into a tiny-windowed room about 
fifteen feet square, with a low ceiling, one bed, and a divan. 
The people about us lived with their animals, went to bed 
with them, and woke up at the same hour with them. Nearly 
every native was barefooted, and went to bed unwashed, got 
up the next morning and went through the grime of the 
streets, and then went to bed again without ever bathing his 
body or feet, until the dirt and dung caked on them and 
formed a leathery protective coating, I was convinced that soap 
and water alone could never remove it. The street on which 
we made our home was typical of provincial Egypt. All day 
long, adults urinated against the walls, while children and 
teen-agers splotched their excr ement anywhere, usually near 
the base of the walls, so that it was positively unsafe to walk 
anywhere but in the middle of the street. Even though the 
dung soon dried in the intense heat of day, swarms of green- 
black flies always festered th ere, especially when someone 
stepped on the mounds. Garbage was cast indiscriminately in 
the streets. All day long women threw panfuls of house water 
into the streets. Ma'alesh! 
Hordes of children played among the refuse, and the in- 
evitable droppings of donkeys, dogs, cats, chickens, camels, 
and horses. Pitiful, scab-covered, undersized children with 
running eyes scurried about, sores untreated, hair uncombed 
week after week till it was matted  like the underside of a pig. 
They spilled out of their homes in the morning like ants from 
an anthill. They looked exactly as the night before, and the 
morning before, and the night before that. Their clothes, con- 
sisting sometimes of underwear, but usually only a nightshirt, 
had apparently not been wash ed since they had been sewn 
into garments. The first morning I saw a child, its face covered 
with scabs, its nose running. I saw the same child in the 
evening with the matter solidi fying beneath his nose down Of for the Holy War! 147 
to the lips. The next morning he was the same, save that a 
fresh layer was being added to the collection of dirt of the 
last few days. 
As for the women, they seemed to be the main repository of 
filth. Whenever they washed—usu ally in a contaminated river 
—they went into the water dr essed, and in groups, washing 
their dirty clothes and dirty bodi es at the same time. Clay or 
a piece of soft wood usually served as soap. In many villages 
the women never washed thor oughly except on the occasion 
of their marriage and once a year at the feast of Bairam. It was 
comforting to see them go around with faces veiled, for the 
few who were uncovered were revoltingly ugly. 
It was within ten miles of our quarters that the first death 
in Egypt's cholera epidemic of 1947 occurred—a small native 
village, like ours! 
The food we ate was primitive, typical native fare. Our 
staple diet was tamia, ground chickpeas mixed with parsley 
and onions, seasoned with garlic  and blazing-hot pepper, and 
fried patty-shape like hamburgers. We had fasoulia, red kid- 
ney-beans, the poor man's food because it was so cheap. We 
also had fool, fava-beans. We had fool and fasoulia, morning 
noon and night, with the addition of raw onions and black 
olives. I had no idea how the food was prepared, for no man 
dared go into the kitchen where the grocer's wife and relatives 
cooked our rations. At times I wondered about the water we 
drank. Such things had better be left to Allah, who saw every- 
thing anyway. I thought that if I survived this ordeal I'd sur- 
vive anything. 
Our first night here came at the end of a hot and dusty day. 
A tiny gas-lamp cast its yellow glow over one corner of the 
cell we called home. As the other eleven Green Shirts came 
in, they removed their shoes and stockings and wriggled their 
toes to let the air circulate be tween them. Barefooted, some 
went to the dark fenced-off encl osure in the courtyard. This 
was the community toilet. You brought your own paper. At 
night a tiny dim lantern hung inside, but only the buzzing 148 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
swarms of flies could possibly see any better by it. The stench 
that rushed up from the center opening of the sewer was ab- 
solutely unbearable. Ma'alesh! You were supposed to get used 
to it. 
Upon returning, they sat down at the table without further 
ceremony or washing. The table was a circular piece of smooth 
wood, about three feet in diameter and set eight inches above 
the floor in the center of our room. The food was piled high 
on platters. We seated ourselves crosslegged. Then, yallah! 
We reached with our hands. First come, first served. I learned 
to cat Arab fashion, without knife, spoon, or fork. I would dip 
a piece of flat bread, kmaj, into the common pool, holding it 
between the thumb and three fingers, scoop the food with a 
half turn of the wrist and bring it up quickly, tilting the head 
backward to keep the juices from running down the corners 
of my mouth. At first aim, I miscarried the scoopful of fasoulia, 
and it burst above my nose like shrapnel, distributing the 
beans all over my face. Ma'alesh! I pushed them into my 
mouth with fingers that were greasy anyway. A few sessions 
made me fairly skillful though I lacked speed and finesse. In 
due time I acquired both. 
"You are now a full Arab," Moustafa complimented me. 
Next day it became evident that we'd remain stranded. 1 
went with Moustafa, Captain Zaki, Sabri, and Mahmoud to 
Ismailia. I found it a colorful and, in spots, a pretty little city. 
There was an abundance of water, and some of the tree-lined 
boulevards were extremely attractive. English officers lived 
here with their families. Sold iers from near-by camps were 
everywhere. 
We were ravenously hungry, so I treated everyone to a 
lunch of kebab—square cuts of  skewered lamb—after which 
we moved to a sidewalk cafe a nd Moustafa ordered coffee and 
tea. Native life ebbed and flowed around us. Children carried 
blue beads to ward off the evil eye; here a cobbler was soling 
shoes with old tire rubber; there a tinsmith fashioned house- 
ware from discarded cans; from the entrance of a grimy Off for the Holy War! 149 
butcher-shop chunks of raw meat hung from iron hooks. A 
lively backgammon game was. in progress at an adjoining 
table, with a half dozen tanned, turbaned fellaheen watching; 
a camel train passed by, each camel linked to another by 
ropes; down the street, a house was being built with mud 
bricks. A fight started at the corner. The rush-bottomed cafe 
chairs were emptied. 
Moustafa had been suffering for some time with a sore toe. 
In his last encounter with the Haganah a bullet had grazed it. 
He showed me the wound, which had become infected. 
"You had better see a good doctor right now before it gets 
worse." 
"I will go to the barber," Moustafa said. After our coffee, 
we all went to the barber. While Captain Zaki and Mahmoud 
were being shaved, the barber  opened Moustafa 's bandages. 
Using only warm water to wash the toe, and no antiseptic of 
any kind, he lanced it with a j ack-knife. Then he used waste 
cotton to bandage it. 
"That man is worse than a butcher, Moustafa." 
"Never mind, Artour. He's an Arab doctor." 
"Yallah!" 
Yallah this time was to the outskirts of Ismailia, where 
Mahmoud said he wanted to visit relatives. Zaki stayed be- 
hind, giving the excuse that he was tired. We walked for 
nearly an hour through the br oiling sun, through one native 
quarter after another, going slowly because Moustafa's toe was 
extremely painful. 
"Mahmoud must love his relatives to walk all this distance 
in this dust!" 
"He loves them very much." Moustafa and Sabri changed 
glances. 
At last we reached the outskirts, and came to the edge of a 
large empty lot. Beyond this I saw more of the squat, mud- 
baked huts that made up the native quarters. This sand-lot 
was particularly malodorous, or perhaps the wind was blowing 
the wrong way. As we walked, a new form of stench filled the 150 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
air. It wasn't offal. This was something more pungent, awe- 
some, sickening, carnal, like a decomposing cat. Now I be- 
came aware of what seemed to be a hole, about fifty feet 
square, ahead of us. Our path skirted to the left of the sand- 
pit. As we came to it, I took one glance and jerked my head 
away. The pit was filled with the rotting flesh of dogs, cats, 
horses, cows, and other dead animals. It was an open burial 
ground. Part of the carrion still clung to the bones. Other 
parts had been eaten away by the neighborhood cats and dogs. 
Strands of fur hung to the decomposing flesh. The sun had 
bleached white the skulls and skeletons, and the stench that 
rose to God's blue sky was the most nauseating in my experi- 
ence. . . . 
"Where is this -------- relative of Mahmoud's?" I yelled un- 
controllably. 
"On the other side of this held, the first house," Moustafa 
said, smiling. 
At long last we reached the first house. Instead of veiled 
women, we saw women with their faces exposed. Three trol- 
lops were sitting on the stoop, their legs wide apart. It re- 
quired no effort to see that they  were shaven—in keeping with 
an Arab custom that is said to apply to all classes of women, 
and is intended to keep them clean in the hot climate. 
"Are these his relatives? An hour 's walk across that stench 
hole to visit these!." I screamed at Moustafa. 
"If you want to learn Arab life, you must know about 
Mahmoud's relatives." 
Mahmoud looked the girls over, chose one, and went inside 
with her. Moustafa and Sabri ta lked to the other two. Busi- 
ness was slow at this time of day, for the sun overhead was 
blazing, and only a frustrated fool like Mahmoud would make 
the venture. 
"The women have visitors when it's cool, from six o'clock 
till midnight." 
We waited a half hour . . . three quarters of an hour . . . 
one full hour! Off for the Holy War! 151 
"What can Mahmoud be doing there all this time? Surely 
your women can't be different from ours." 
"But our ways are different/' Moustafa insisted. 
At last Mahmoud emerged. He looked as though he had 
been through a steam bath. 
"What's different about your ways?" I asked Moustafa a 
little later. 
"First of all Mahmoud had hasheesh. Then he bought the 
woman some. This makes much difference in what happens 
afterward. You cannot cut short your visit. You can't!" 
Moustafa and Sabri giggled. "This is why our method is dif- 
ferent, and why Mahmoud was in so long. . . . After the 
woman," Moustafa continued to explain, "he had a hot bath. 
Now he can fight the Jew with a clean body." 
MUTINY! 
BUT it was I who almost died with a dirty body, for the next 
night I was almost stabbed, with  my back to the wall. . . . 
After three days and three nights of forced confinement in 
cramped quarters and continual frustration, the sizzling Arab 
temper provided the final catalytic. Sharp distinctions arose 
between East and West: Followers of Truth on the one hand, 
and the Green Shirts on the other. 
Sheikh Azaayim, leader of the Followers of Truth, was run- 
ning low on the food we had brought. And the grocer, a tack- 
headed capitalist, was showing little appreciation for our noble 
mission. He was gouging Azaayim with high prices for addi- 
tional food, rental, and incident als. "My" side blamed Azaa- 
yim for botching the whole thing. The sheikh, with more 
truth, blamed the Green Shirts for staging a public parade 
and inviting the wrath of government officials who, mindful of 
the Green Shirt record during the war, had no desire to harbor 
any armed and trained private armies in Egypt. Moustafa and 152 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Captain Zaki threatened to leav e, depriving the Followers of 
Truth of military leadership. The sheikh insisted they must 
remain. "After all, I brought you here. I've paid you. I've fed 
you and housed you in comfort." The Green Shirts countered 
by saying they had left Cairo to fight the Jew in Palestine, not 
stagnate in a pigsty. The atmosphere was charged with ten- 
sion. East and West henchmen rarely spoke now, except in 
anger, hands on revolve rs or daggers. I tried to be friendly to 
both sides, and keep out of the family quarrel. One reads about 
"explosive" situations. This was it! If anything blew up, I 
knew I'd be in the middle of it, for the Arab temper, usually 
quiescent, once aroused becomes blind in its passions. 
That night once again I heard the chant: "We are going to 
fight for Allah and Allah will protect us from harm." As we 
weren't going anywhere, I wondered why the war cry this time 
of night. It continued for an hour and was driving us to 
desperation. 
"They don't know any better." Moustafa said. "They are 
fanatics!" 
I decided to investigate. 
"Don't stay away long," Moustafa warned. "They don't like 
us—and especially they don't like Americans. Don't go inside 
their tent." 
I walked past their sentry. "Assalamu aleikum. Peace be 
upon you," I said. 
"Wa aleikuin salam," he grunted. "Upon you peace." 
I opened the tent flap. The sight was common enough. 
Against a background of colored canopies and rugs, the 
fellaheen fighters, crosslegged on mats, were swaying rhythmi- 
cally, in perfect accompaniment to the weird chant. Their eyes 
were half-closed as if under trance, their faces feverish. This 
was Jehad, in the making. I had no doubt that some of them 
had taken hasheesh. The leaders were reading responsively to 
the chant from dog-eared copies of the Koran. Some Followers 
of Truth were in their American  army surplus khaki, in full 
battle dress, with steel helmets, cartridge belt, daggers and all. Off for the Holy War! 153 
I had already photographed one of them with his "gizzard 
slitter"—the name I gave to a particularly ugly dagger, the 
handle of which was a brass knuckle. There seemed to be 
stranger elements among the Followers of Truth. They were 
wearing calico skullcaps and gallabiyas. These vicious thugs 
had arrived the day before. Moustafa told me he suspected 
them of being imported to fight the Green Shirts if a show- 
down battle developed. 
The chanting stopped as I entered. Glares took its place. I 
offered to take pictures. The Followers obeyed in surly fashion, 
not because they liked me or wanted to be photographed, but 
because Sheikh Azaayim had approv ed my photography. I took 
several flashlight photos. Then I tried to leave. But they 
stepped up and wanted to see the prints at once, poking their 
long dirty nails into the shutter opening. Trying to protect my 
precious camera, I explained somehow that they would have 
them by sabah, by morning. They went away, sullen, and I 
stepped into the night. 
While inside I had noticed movements at the farther end 
of the tent, a closed portion, with figures constantly brushing 
against the canopies. I passed the sentry and went to the 
farther end of the tent to investigate. I was about to lift the 
flap, when I felt myself jerked up by the neck to an upright 
position and slammed against the wall of the grocery store. 
At the same time a sharp hard object was jabbed against my 
left side. A scant six inches from my nose was the outline of a 
frenzied face and bared teeth. Hot, carnal breath, and a hot 
volley of words I did not understand poured out at me. Strong 
fingers with sharp nails were tightened around my throat, so 
that breathing became difficult, and I was unable to cry out. 
To rip away the choking fingers would, I was sure, have re- 
sulted in being jabbed with the knife. My only defense lay in 
dirty alley fighting. 
I was about to kick my assailant viciously in the groin, and 
simultaneously push away the knife blade, when I heard the 
cracking of bone against bone, and a knuckled fist smashed 154 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
against the face. It was Mousta fa to the rescue! The Follower 
of Truth hit the dust. As he came up, knife brandished in 
mid-air, Moustafa whipped out his revolver and pointed it 
straight at the heart of the enraged fellah. In low, guttural 
words, hardly audible beyond our intimate circle, I heard 
Moustafa growl at my would-be assassin the equivalent of: 
"One more step, and you're a dead son of Allah!" 
"Go back into the room, Artour," Moustafa commanded. 
I waited for him at the entrance to the grocer's home. 
"Now Followers of Truth will surely try to kill you, 
Moustafa," I said. 
"Not me alone, but you, too, and all the Green Shirts," he 
answered calmly. "We will have to be ready for them. Come." 
I touched him on the arm. "Moustafa, you saved my life. 
What I have is yours. Wish it, and you shall have it." I 
meant every word. At the same time, I was following Arab 
tradition. 
Moustafa hesitated. "I want your friendship, Artour." 
"You shall have my loyalty as long as I live." 
We hurried to our suffocating flea-hold and alerted the 
boys. They made sure revolvers  were loaded, daggers ready, 
and used what little furniture there was to barricade the door. 
This immediately cut off our only escape because our single 
barred window looked into a blind alley. 
"I am sorry to have caused you all the trouble," I said to 
Moustafa and Zaki. "If I go away maybe things will quiet 
down. I'll go gladly." 
"Don't be afraid for our sake," Moustafa said. "If you are 
afraid for yourself, then we can't stop you from going." 
"I'll stay." 
In my shirt pocket, over my heart, were three little objects, 
chained together. First, a medallion with the Madonna and 
Child of the Armenian Church. It had been tied to my bed- 
post as a child, and Mother be lieved the Maryam Asdvadza- 
mayr yev Christos (Mary, Mother of Jesus, and the Christ 
Child) would protect me on my journey. Attached to it was Off for the Holy War! 155 
a St. Christopher's medal that a Catholic friend had given me 
for the same purpose. The third object was a Jewish mezuzah, 
a tiny metal tube in which was a paper scroll with the Ten 
Commandments inscribed upon it, given to me by a Jewish 
friend to insure my safe retu rn. With these in my hand, I 
silently prayed now, summoning all three faiths to my pro- 
tection. Sheikh Azaayim had got drunk earlier in the evening, 
and was now sleeping it off. It wasn't likely that his men 
would attack without his orders, but anything might provide 
the spark and touch off the Jehad-crazed, hasheesh-maddened 
Followers any minute. 
With the boys listening to every sound to forestall a sur- 
prise attack, there was no sleep that night. Moustafa and I 
talked in whispers. "What made you come after me at just 
the right second?" I asked. 
"I don't know. You were gone a long time, when suddenly 
I got a call inside of me. It must have been Allah. You are a 
lucky Armenian, Artour." 
"A lucky American," I corrected. "By the way, Moustafa, 
what was going on so secretly in the tent? Were they pray- 
ing?" 
"No, it was long past the hour of the last prayer." 
"Then what could they be doing?" I insisted. 
"Maybe they were visiting w ith relatives," Moustafa said 
with a smile. 
"Male or female?" 
Moustafa looked at me strangely. "Male." 
Through the barred window we could see the first light of 
dawn. We moved the furniture away from the door, opened 
it, and Moustafa stole out. He returned with Arab bread, 
which is delicious when fresh, but like plastic when it is not, 
and a large plate of ground chickpeas. 
"After we eat, we leave," Captain Zaki said. "If we don't 
go now, there'll be blood in the streets. We didn't come here 
to fight Arabs." 
"We will take a train to Rara," Moustafa said. Rafa was the 156 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
last town on the Egyptian side of the Palestine border. From 
there we would cross the border to Beersheba and then trust 
to luck to reach Jerusalem. 
We finished in silence. Th e boys packed their things. 
"Yallah!" 
Quickly and silently we slipped out, circled the tent jammed 
with Followers of Truth, and in hushed single file walked past 
the mud-built houses. Dawn had come in full glory. Life be- 
gan to stir about us; rickety shutters flew open, squeaking on 
their hinges. Women splattered the streets with the contents 
of bedpans, keeping the dust down at the same time. Donkeys 
and children had already littered the streets. We looked be- 
hind. A squad of Followers of Truth were lurking in our rear. 
They grew in numbers as we walked quickly, close to the walls 
—where in a way, it was safer , though unclean. Soon we lost 
ourselves in Ismailia. 
"We are now going to visit a rich Moslem and ask for 
money for train tickets." Zaki said. "We want you to come 
with us. Maybe he will like to  have his picture taken." 
We went to an expensively furnished home. Our host, a 
portly Arab, eyed us all with suspicion. He wanted to know 
what the lone American was doing. Perhaps I was a foreign 
agent! Oh, no, Moustafa assu red him. I was Exhibit A—an 
American who hated the Jews so much that he had come 
5,500 miles to fight them. I was also a wonderful photogra- 
pher. The wealthy Arab wasn't impressed. He had been 
solicited before, and was cautious with his money. Ultimately, 
he proved to be a member of the Ikhwan, with no love for the 
Green Shirts. He offered us fine Arab coffee. Otherwise, our 
mission was a failure. 
"We will have to pay for the tickets ourselves," Zaki said. 
Late in the afternoon we took the train for El Qantara, the 
Suez Canal terminal for trains to Palestine. It was night when 
we arrived. Moustafa made us  wait while he went to the 
customs office to fix matters. I had explained that I could not 
hope to pass with my cameras because I had not been asked Off for the Holy War! 157 
to declare them when I first arrived in Egypt. I had also told 
Moustafa that owing to our delay in Ismailia, my Egyptian 
visa had expired. Normally, both were grave offenses. 
"Don't worry about anything," Moustafa said. 
To my astonishment, the usually bureaucratic Egyptian 
custom officials chalked my bags without opening them. With 
Moustafa again supervising, my passport was stamped, and I 
was through. Getting on the train became a real problem. 
It was packed tighter than a New York subway at rush hour. 
The door was impossible to open, so Moustafa and I scrambled 
in through the windows. The other Green Shirts scattered to 
other cars. Captain Zaki, being large and plump, found the 
window too tight for his girth. He had worked his way through 
to his hips—and then he was stuck. The train whistle blew 
for the third time. The train lurched forward: with might and 
main we pushed the captain out, then desperately Moustafa 
and I began to remove baggage from the doorway, throwing 
it in every direction, with no heed to the shouting owners. 
When Zaki finally leaped aboard, the train was already past 
the platform. 
"FORGET YOU ARE AMERICAN" 
I WAS standing chest-high in baggage. I had long lost trace 
of my own. The three of us stood together now amid the in- 
furiated passengers who were sc reaming for their luggage. We 
had landed in a third-class compartment. There was no light. 
As soon as the train got beyond the town, we were in pitch- 
black darkness. My flashlight was a life-saver. Gradually every- 
one found his belongings, barricaded himself behind them, 
and a semblance of quiet was restored. Our companions were 
a farmer, two soldiers, a Palestinian policeman, a boy sleeping 
on baggage, and two women—veiled despite the midnight 
blackness—squatting beside half a dozen baskets filled with 158 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
vegetables and personal belongings.  As luck would have it, I 
was seated between a basket fille d with dried garlic done up in 
braids and a basket of reeking scallions. Caught between these 
stenches, I stuck my nose in a corner of the window. After 
several hours of this, the fresh air made me so hungry—we 
hadn't had supper—that I asked Moustafa for some of the 
food we carried. 
"Sabri has it. But wait, Artour, we'll get food someplace." 
Moustafa's neighbor was the Palestinian policeman, wear- 
ing the kalpak, black woolen headpiece. Moustafa engaged him 
in conversation. As he talked I could see by the movement of 
his glowing cigarette tip that the Palestinian was repeatedly 
turning in my direction. He w as so touched by the richly em- 
bellished story of an American travelling 5,500 miles to fight 
the Jehad side by side with the Arabs' own Holy Warriors, 
that Moustafa turned to rac: 
"He wants to see your beautiful face. Give me your flash- 
light." 
By this time, everybody for several layers around had heard 
the wondrous talc of the brave and noble American who had 
been living with the Arabs and was going to war with them, so 
that when Moustafa directed the light on my face, I found 
myself the center of attention. 
"Allah, Allah." These were sighs of satisfaction. 
"But he looks Arab," the Palestinian said. "He must be a 
brother Moslem." 
"Perhaps we shall make him one soon," Moustafa said sug- 
gestively, eying the policeman's basket of food. 
"Insh'allah! Insh'allah!" 
There was no difficulty after that. My flashlight revealed 
four loaves of bread, olives, white cheese, halvah, and oranges. 
The woman with the scallions made a generous contribution 
to our supper. Raw onions, and scallions in particular, have 
always caused me distress. But to refuse food offered by an 
Arab is tantamount to an insult, especially when done by an 
American. I managed the ordeal somehow, proffering my Off for the Holy War! 159 
thanks to the woman and the policeman. In the name of 
Allah, I wished them a full larder. "May you never taste of 
hunger to the end of your days," I said through Moustafa. 
"Sutra daimeh memnoun. May your table always be full, 
thank you." 
The train rumbled on with a slow, rhythmic beat. The sky 
was clear, and the stars were out in their full splendor. We had 
eaten, and now we rested. Quiet had settled over the car, 
broken only by snoring, and th e endless coughing of the aged. 
Someone closed the windows because it was growing cold; 
moreover, the Arab prefers to sl eep in a warm, air-tight room. 
The odor of garlic and scallions, thus kept pure from any con- 
tamination by fresh air, reached full flower. My nostrils stung 
and my eyes watered. I decided to imitate the Arabs. I stopped 
resisting. "It must be kismet," I said resignedly. Resting my 
head against my knapsack, my nose no more than ten inches 
from the nearest bouquet of scallions, I asphyxiated myself 
to sleep. 
The sun was just breaking over a horizon of bleak sand 
dunes when our train pulled into Rafa on the frontier sepa- 
rating Egypt from Palestine. In ancient days Rafa was a 
Byzantine bishopric. Now it was a shambles of native homes. 
It was also a rendezvous for narcotic wholesalers. Hasheesh 
smugglers, after crossing Palestine, often met here. Those 
smuggling the drug by motorboat made their delivery on the 
coast near by. Moustafa warned me that the railway station 
swarmed with British and Egyptian government agents. Pas- 
sengers were usually screened, their baggage rechecked, and 
passports reinspected. 
"I will carry your bag as my own," Captain Zaki said. He 
was now dressed in the official uniform of an Egyptian army 
captain. "Keep the khaffiya on your head. Remember, speak 
to no one!" 
My heart pounded as I waited. But with my full-grown 
mustache, deep tan, wrinkled kh aki, I looked as Arab as any- 
one on the train. The boys had covered their Green Shirt 160 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
armbands. As we walked on the platform they maneuvered 
me into the middle position so that if anyone asked questions 
there would be many to answer in Arabic. We trooped past a 
gauntlet of inspectors; one of  them halted Moustafa, and 
asked about us. He was joined by another who made a random 
check of our knapsacks. He chose to dig into mine. Happily 
it contained nothing but clothing. He spoke to me in Arabic: 
Moustafa and Captain Zaki quickly volunteered the answers. 
The man waved us on. . . . We had passed the last Egyptian 
checkpost and were free to go on to Palestine. 
"He wanted to know if you have  a camera," Moustafa said, 
when we were out of earshot. "It is forbidden in a military 
zone." 
"From now on," Zaki added, "tell no one you are from 
America. Forget you are an American/ You are an Armenian 
from Turkey. Speak only Armenian and Turkish to strangers." 
We headed toward a shanty to wn on the outskirts of Rafa, 
to make arrangements for transportation to Beersheba, Arab 
headquarters at the gates of the Negev, the great southern 
desert of Palestine. Rafa itself had boomed in the last few 
months, and served as an outpost for volunteer fighters, gun- 
runners, and Arab refugees alre ady fleeing from Palestine. As 
early as the end of March 1948, Cairo was crowded with 
wealthy Palestinian refugees, bot h Moslem and Christian, who 
had left their homes voluntarily, even though widespread fight- 
ing had not yet broken out. By ten o'clock Moustafa and Zaki 
had located a gun-running truck leaving for Beersheba. 
Yallah! We climbed into the truck and rode until we 
reached the Palestine border. There we were halted by British 
soldiers. Two tanks stood near by. Beyond was a large British 
camp. The Green Shirts had now hidden their own guns and 
insignia, and posed as native Pa lestinians. The English went 
through the formality of asking: "Any guns on the truck?" 
We said: "No," laughing. The soldiers smiled back, took 
down our license number and, lifting the wooden barrier, let 
us through. We were in Palestine! Off for the Holy War! 161 
As our truck rolled on, I began to itch with more than the 
usual vigor. At first I thought it resulted from my desperate 
need of a bath. But the itch was a curious kind of an itch. 
This was under the arms, and on my back, and stung like tiny 
needles. Fleas? When the itch reached the crook of my arm,. 
I rolled up my sleeve and easily caught the culprits— LICE! I 
showed them to Moustafa. 
"That's nothing," he said, scratching himself. "We'll get 
DDT when we reach Jerusalem." 
"Let's get it around here so that we can sleep tonight." 
"I don't think you'll find any. Only the Jews have it." He 
grinned. "You have clean blood, Artour. If you didn't, the 
lice would not come to you." 
"What do you mean?" 
"Lice don't come to you if you have syphilis." 
I don't know how true this is . On another occasion, while 
Moustafa and I were scratching fiercely, he observed: "We 
have fleas, Artour." 
"How do you know they are fleas?" I asked. 
"By the way they bite. Fleas bite different." 
I never mastered the distinction, but I learned that psycho- 
logically the effect was different . Lice gave one the feeling of 
uncleanliness, of guilt. But one laughed off fleas, perhaps be- 
cause the pets we had back home usually had fleas in summer, 
and no stigma was attached. 
But it was no disgrace to get lice in the Arab world. It was 
discussed as we discuss a common cold. Bedouin men and 
women are lice-ridden from cradle to grave. To meet a Bed- 
ouin socially and not match hi s scratching is, as Moustafa 
pointed out, a sign of uncleanliness. For me it was a badge of 
success, for it meant that my initiation as a native was now 
complete. 
We arrived in Beersheba as th e shadows deepened in the 
west. Moustafa and Zaki reported immediately to the police 
station, where we were all cleared. After looking around for a 
place to sleep, we located rooms in a Moslem school, already 162 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
occupied by other volunteers. The place was comparatively 
clean. I washed thoroughly. Stretching out on an army cot, I 
spent my first peaceful night since leaving Cairo. I slept 
soundly, oblivious to the fierce, biting onslaughts of my newly 
acquired friends. It showed how much of an Arab I had be- 
come! (CHAPTER IX) 
THE HOLY CITY 
"I pray to Allah to destroy the Jews. I pray to Allah 
to punish President Truman because he has been 
on the Zionist side. I used to pray against President 
Roosevelt, a very bad man. . . . May Balfour and 
Roosevelt take the first place in hell. Allah, Allah, 
may this be done." 
"You sound like a Moslem  Republican," I said. 
Interview with Sheikh Ismail el Ansary 
BEERSHEBA marked the southernmost limits of Biblical 
Palestine ("from Dan to Beersheb a.") Most of its two thou- 
sand inhabitants now were Be douins, or former Bedouins 
turned to the comforts of town life. Within a year it was to 
become an almost all-Jewish  town, as the Arabs fled and 
Jewish refugees from Europe were settled there. 
Here, in this green, extremely picturesque frontier post and 
supply oasis we remained for a few days, to raise funds and ar- 
range for transportation to Jerusalem, fifty miles to the north. 
It was a pleasant respite. The wide, dusty main street was 
lined with trees. Here passed coffee vendors, porters with 
stacks of dried skins, and innumerable bronzed Bedouins on 
camels. A trading and smuggling center, Beersheba trafficked 
in arms and hasheesh, and also boa sted several rifle factories, 
at this moment working at top speed. 164 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Not far from Beersheba I saw my first Jewish communal set- 
tlement, Kibbutz Beit Eshel. With its well-tended orchards 
and green trees, Beit Eshel rose like an oasis from the bleak, 
dust-packed Negev desert around it. A kibbutz was always 
conspicuous by its water tower,  silo, and modern farm build- 
ings, and contrasted sharply with  the squalor of Arab villages. 
Moustafa pointed at Bert Eshel with awe. "We have at- 
tacked it, but the Jews are we ll armed. They have built a 
Maginot Line around their place and fight you from under 
the ground. They are cowards." Later, I was to see astonishing 
examples of Jewish ingenuity—and understand exactly what 
Moustafa meant. "After May 15 Beit Eshel will be ours. The 
Egyptian army will make it one with the desert." 
"Insh'allah! Insh'allah! With God's help," I said. 
Surrounded by Arabs and desert, a lone sentry in the 
wilderness, I could not imagine how Beit Eshel could ever 
hold out against massed troops and heavy artillery.1 Inquiring 
discreetly, I learned that the kibbutz had already taken a toll 
of attacking Arabs. It was supplied by a daring airlift and 
sometimes by food and ammunition convoys that boldly ran 
the gauntlet of Arab soldiers all the way from coastal Tel 
Aviv, seventy miles across the desert. 
I don't know how our boys arranged it, but next day six of 
us were invited to lunch by the mayor of Beersheba. His home 
was clean and airy, the furniture lined stiffly against the wall 
and embalmed in white slipc overs. As usual, we saw no 
women. The dining-room table was heaped with huge plat- 
ters of food. For dessert, we had baklawa, made of tissue-thin 
layers of dough, baked a golde n brown and saturated with 
nuts and syrup. Prompted by our host, we gorged ourselves for 
two hours. It was our most sumptuous meal since Cairo. After 
dinner I took a photograph of my dinner companions—four- 
teen assorted Arabs. 
1 But it did. On one occasion the settl ement's armory consisted of twelve 
rifles and two machine-guns . The Egyptian army atta cked in battalion strength 
with heavy artillery, and was repeatedly beaten back. The Holy City 165 
Among them was Rashad Y. Sakka, who according to his 
card was "Mambe of Municipl Council" of Beersheba. His 
English was on a par with his spelling. Sakka looked forward 
to the Mufti's seizure of all Palestine. "We have not a better 
man. He is a faithful Moslem." Sakka told me that Mr. and 
Mrs. Kermit Roosevelt had visited Beersheba for two days, 
dined with a sheikh in his tent, and had been impressed with 
Bedouin life. 
THE BEDOUIN KING OF BEERSHEBA 
IN THE morning of the third day Moustafa asked rne to ac- 
company him to the home of a rich Arab who might help us 
with money and arms. I went with him to a house built solidly 
of stone, with windows heavily barred, the lower half of each 
window latticed Turkish fashion to enable the women inside 
to peer out yet remain invisible to the passerby. We were 
halted at the iron door by a sentry. A half dozen other armed 
Bedouins sprawled in the courtyard. Another sentry allowed 
us no farther than the porch. There we waited for Sheikh 
Salaam, a Bedouin tribal chief. He was a short, wizened man 
with a face the color of burnt copper. He had tiny, cunning 
eyes and a tight and narrow mouth from which the words 
came sparingly. He was draped  in a flowing black burnous, 
gold-braided at the neck. Around his waist was a cartridge 
belt, revolver, and a curved dagger, standard Bedouin equip- 
ment. He took Moustafa inside with him. 
I learned the sheikh's record. Already wealthy through 
border traffic, he had bought land cheaply from Bedouins, and 
later sold it at extravagant pri ces to Jews, amassing even greater 
wealth. The vengeful Bedouins demanded an accounting. The 
sheikh promptly turned against the Jews, and emerged a top 
Arab patriot. 
Moustafa came away empty-handed from the sheikh. "He is 
rich but he does not give baksheesh. He is not patriotic," 166 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Moustafa complained bitterly. "His enemies will kill him very 
soon." 
While Moustafa had attempted to persuade the sheikh to 
help us, I had been browsing outside. A short, chunky young 
man with a military shirt and leggings sought admission and 
was brusquely turned away amid a vicious exchange of words. 
I watched from the safety of the doorway as he stood there, 
cursing. As he left, he saw me and said gruffly: "Sabah il-kher. 
Good morning." 
"Ussaid hel sabah min'allah. May Allah give you a good 
morning." 
The way I pronounced the words made him turn around. 
"Are you English?" he asked. 
"La, no. American." 
It was the beginning of a stormy friendship that was to alter 
the entire course of my adventures with the Arabs. The young 
man—Faris—was from Jerusalem. An idea came to me. 
"Meet us at the schoolhouse at noon," I said. "It will be to 
your interest." 
I told Moustafa about Faris and suggested that we ask 
him to take us to Jerusalem. Our boys had no money by this 
time; they had counted on Sheikh Azaayim for help; they were 
willing now to fight for anybody who would feed and arm 
them. Moustafa thought my idea excellent. He had a plan to 
enlist the support of Jerusalem Arabs once we reached the 
city. Captain Zaki and the boys agreed to let Moustafa go 
ahead and arrange matters, while they remained in Beersheba 
and tried to enlist local support. When Faris came at noon, 
we asked if he would take the two of us. He agreed. 
"To Jerusalem!" Moustafa said, delighted. "Yallah!" 
Our credentials were carefully  inspected on the way out. 
My authorization from Al Misri and the letter from the 
Mufti's Arab Higher Committee passed the test. We took the 
road north. The brown scorched land all around us spoke of 
the barrenness of man's neglect. It was covered with out- 
croppings of rock and sparse thin grass as far as the eye could The Holy City 167 
reach. The telephone lines had been cut. Later I saw saboteurs 
at work—Arabs systematically stripping the wires for their 
copper content. They would melt them into bullets. 
We reached Hebron, the Bibli cal tombsite of Abraham and 
Sarah, Isaac, Rebecca, and finally Jacob. In more recent times 
Hebron had the dubious distinction of being the first Pales- 
tinian town whose Jews were completely exterminated by the 
Arabs; this massacre took place in 1929 during the Mufti- 
organized attacks, which he directed from Hebron. Built be- 
tween two rugged hillsides, the town was a natural fortress, 
known for the ferociousness, brutality, and homosexuality of 
its inhabitants. The inspection of our papers was severe. I 
passed again. 
The road from Hebron to Jerusalem traversed ground of 
hallowed antiquity. Here was the spot where, under the oak, 
Abraham received the three angels and where, later, David was 
anointed king. We passed Bethlehem, with its numerous 
churches, and beyond it the Well of the Magi, where the Star 
that they followed again appear ed to the three Wise Men. We 
drove past the remains of an aqueduct built by Pontius 
Pilate. Then, as we came to Rachel's tomb, near which the 
Jews had built Kibbutz Ramat Rahel, Fans suddenly brought 
me to the present by commanding sharply: "Get down in the 
car! The Jews will shoot if you look out the window." 
ON THE HILL OF EVIL COUNSEL 
LATE in the afternoon, as the sun cast its deep shadows over 
the countryside, now extraordinarily lovely with its terraced 
fields, its freshly furrowed earth, and blossoming orchards of 
fig, almond, cherry, and olive trees, we reached the first 
Jerusalem roadblock. We drove straight to Faris's home in 
Deir Aboutor, a sector built on the lower end of a promontory 
called the Hill of Evil Counsel, just outside the Old City of 168 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Jerusalem. From here the Holy City presented an indescribably 
beautiful and majestic panorama, breathtaking in the Biblical 
history it encompassed. 
On the left was the Jewish-bu ilt New City, the striking and 
imposing tower of the Young Me n's Christian Association, 
the luxurious King David Hotel, and clusters of rugged stone 
buildings. Beyond, on Biblical Mount Scopus, now kissed by 
the setting sun, were the classic modern buildings of the He- 
brew University and the Hadassah  Hospital. Far to the right 
I could see the mountains of Trans-Jordan rising above the 
depression of the Dead Sea. 
Mount Zion was directly across from us. On the Mount of 
Olives was the stately Church of the Ascension, with the 
Garden of Gethsemane at its base. David's Tower, the 
Citadel, and the massive serra ted Old City walls commanded 
attention in the foreground. Inside those walls, built in the 
shape of a crooked rectangle about a square mile in area, was 
the Old City of Jerusalem. From where I stood I could see 
the giant Dome of the Rock—the Mosque of Omar—Islam's 
holy shrine, built over the spot where the Prophet is supposed 
to have ascended to heaven. Within those Old City walls, too, 
were the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Golgotha, the Wail- 
ing Wall, and scores of shrines holy to three faiths, which had 
made Jerusalem, with its strategic position, the most fought- 
over city in the world for twenty centuries and more. 
But this was no time for reverie. Faris took us immedi- 
ately to the home of his cousin, Hashim. There we had sup- 
per, and were put up for the night. When I saw our host wear- 
ing the insignia of Ikhwan el Muslimin, I said to him: "I 
have met your Moorshid in Cairo. A great man, a very noble 
man. May Allah preserve him." 
It pleased him immensely. 
I found Deir Aboutor bristling with artillery, most of it 
hidden for future use, for at this moment—a month and more 
before the British mandate was to end—it was illegal to pos- 
sess arms, let alone fire them, although thousands, both Arab The Holy City 169 
and Jew, were doing so. Dcir Aboutor was the central Arab 
headquarters outside the Old City of Jerusalem. More than 
two hundred soldiers were living here in the homes of Arabs 
who had fled. 
Early the next morning Moustafa and I took a bus for the 
Old City, which was held by the Arabs. One could walk the 
distance, but it meant passing the Jewish Yemin Moshe sec- 
tion outside the city walls. The Arabs had blown up many of 
its houses and the Haganah forces, in retaliation, blasted away 
at Arab trucks passing over the roads it commanded. Buses 
and taxis, however, were not molested. Buses were armor- 
plated, with tiny peepholes fo r windows. The armor was more 
psychological than practical, because a bullet fired at a hun- 
dred yards could easily penetrate it. To my surprise, Arabs 
here not only respected but feared Jewish fighters—a far cry 
from the bravado I had met in Egypt. 
We entered the Old City thro ugh Jaffa Gate—one of the 
seven entrances cut into the great rectangular wall. Moustafa 
took me directly to the offices of the Arab Higher Committee, 
where I received an identity card. Then, through twisting 
cobblestone alleys that passed for streets, lined with bazaars 
and tiny cubbyhole workshops, threading our way among ped- 
dlers, donkeys, bootblacks, children, natives, walking over the 
waste and refuse of centuries littering the Via Dolorosa—the 
road that Jesus traveled on the way to Golgotha—we reached 
Raudat el Maaref. This, a former police station, was now Arab 
military headquarters in the Old City. How strangely Biblical 
history repeated itself, I thought. On this very site Pontius 
Pilate had made his headquarters 1,900 years ago. It was to 
this spot that Christ was brought in chains before the Roman 
governor. This was the first of fourteen stations of the Way 
of the Cross. A few dozen yards away He was scourged. 
All this was of absorbing interest to me as a Christian from 
America, but the filth, the cold commercialism, of the Old 
City merchants tarnished the aura of holiness that I had at- 
tached to the Holy City. On e could buy hand-grenades, bul- 170 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
lets, pistols, rifles, and even larger arms within shadow of 
Christendom's holiest shrine, the Church of the Holy Sepul- 
chre. Lecherous guides certainly inspired no Christian senti- 
ment. Except for isolated spots holy to Christendom, reveren- 
tially kept, and truly inspiring to  visit, such as the churches, 
monasteries, hospices, and mission houses (as well as the cen- 
ters revered by the Jews), the Old City was basically Islamic 
in culture, mode of living, and psychology. 
These were my first impressions as Moustafa and I were 
ushered into the presence of Captain Fadhil Rashid Bey, Arab 
military commander of Jerusalem. He was soft-spoken in con- 
trast to the braggarts I had met so far. An Iraqi, he had been 
trained by Germans and, as he told me, had participated in 
the pro-Nazi revolt of 1941 in Iraq, which for two desperate 
months threatened to turn the entire Middle East into a Nazi 
camp.2 Moustafa gave me a fla ttering introduction as a cor- 
respondent and a German sympathizer, so that Rashid Bey 
and I got along famously from the outset. I took his photo- 
graph and he was pleased. I ask ed him deferentially how well 
he knew the Mufti. 
"I am commander of Jerusalem because of the Mufti. I 
knew him in Iraq." 
RUFFIANS ALL 
RASHID BEY'S job was not enviable. He had no regular 
army, but a vast rabble of largely unemployed, impoverished, 
loot-hungry Arab hooligans, whom  even the respectable Mos- 
lems feared and avoided. There was no dearth of experienced 
fighters. Many were veterans  of the Mufti's 1929 and 1936-9 
revolts. Some had spent the war years in Germany, had been 
thoroughly indoctrinated, and were now excellent propagan- 
dists. Others had served in the Axis-sponsored Moslem Le- 
2 The story is told in Chapter XXII. The Holy City 171 
gions organized under the Mufti's guidance. There was also 
the Mufti's Youth Corps—Futu wa—reorganized by Jamal 
Bey el Husseini, the Mufti's cousin and chairman of the Arab 
Higher Committee. There were, too, a strong representation 
of Ikhwan el Muslimin thugs, select ruffians from Hebron, 
and thousands of other shiftless,  semiliterate marauders. They 
were undisciplined and outlaw fighters all, inept at teamwork, 
but dangerous when fighting individually or in small bands as 
guerrillas, with loot—in any form—as the primary objective. 
These were the Arab gangs that, with the aid of technically 
skilled deserters from the British army, in recent months had 
blown up the Palestine Post and the Jewish Agency Building, 
bombed Ben Yehuda street, the principal Jewish business 
thoroughfare, and laid mines. As I strolled about I could see 
that they were in an extremely cocky and festive mood. They 
had made this last week in March a black week for the Jews. 
With foolhardy courage, the Haganah had sent a large convoy 
to supply Kfar Etzion—a chain of four kibbutzim—perched 
on a strategic hilltop commanding the road to Jerusalem from 
the South. The convoy had su ccessfully charged through a 
fifteen mile gauntlet of Arab villages and numerous road- 
blocks, mines, and snipers' posts. 
On its way back, however, the story was different. The Jews 
met Arabs under Abdul Kader el Husseini, a relative of the 
Mufti, who had served him in the Iraq-Nazi revolt and was 
now commander of Arab forces in the Jerusalem area. At Nebi 
Daniel (site of a small Arab village named for the prophet 
Daniel) huge roadblocks halted the returning convoy. A fierce 
battle began. Cornered, the Haganah commander regrouped 
his vehicles on three sides of a square, with a ruined wall form- 
ing the fourth side. The battle raged for thirty-six hours be- 
tween some two hundred Jews and more than three thousand 
Arabs who had surrounded them and cut them off from all 
help. 
British forces were still responsible for "law and order." 
They were in Palestine to pr event precisely such battles as 172 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
this. But when the British finally intervened, it was to strike 
a bargain with the Arabs. In re turn for the safety of the sur- 
viving Jews, the Arabs were to take all the Haganah arms and 
equipment. To prolong a hopeless struggle against odds of 
fifteen to one would have meant the eventual destruction of 
the Jewish fighting force as well as the loss of vehicles. The 
Haganah commander capitulated. The English escorted his 
men to Jerusalem. To the Jews it meant the loss of almost 
their entire fleet of armored trucks in Jerusalem. They also 
lost twelve men. The Arab toll in this "Battle of the Roads" 
was 135 dead. 
The next day on sale everywhere in the Holy City were 
gruesome photographs of the battle: the burnt and mutilated 
bodies of Haganah men, which for some perverse Arab reason, 
had been stripped of clothing and photographed in the nude. 
These naked shots hit "Holy" City markets afresh after every 
battle, and sold rapidly. Arabs carried them in their wallets 
and displayed them frequently, getting the same weird, ab- 
normal "kick" that our perver ts derive from nude photographs 
of women. 
After our first night at the home of Faris's cousin, we 
moved to our permanent headquarters near by on Deir 
Aboutor. This was a two-storied house that according to the 
stationery I found there was once the "Todd Osborne House." 
It had served as the "Mission to Mediterranean Garrisons, 
S. F. Couples, Superintendent." On my third day in Jerusa- 
lem I risked crossing to the Jewish side—the Jews were in 
control of most of the New City—to reach the YMCA for a 
night's rest and a hot shower such as I hadn't enjoyed since 
London. There was another urgent reason: the lice had multi- 
plied and the itching had become unbearable. I had no means 
to delouse my clothing. I had no place to take a bath. The 
only antidote was DDT—obtainable only on the Jewish side. 
Crossing from one side to the other was dangerous, though 
the distance was only about five hundred yards. Trigger-happy The Holy City 173 
snipers shot at any figure seen cr ossing the lines, on the theory 
that the Jews should stay on the Jewish side and Arabs on the 
Arab side. I found a way that I thought minimized the risk of 
being sniped at from the front  as well as from the back. My 
route led under barbed wire past the railway station, up a 
deserted, rubble-strewn street, past several houses that looked 
deserted but may not have been , through two British check- 
posts, and across an open space particularly susceptible to 
Arab snipers. I negotiated the turns and twists without mis- 
hap. When I reached the YMCA I found it magnificent— 
with swimming pool, library, game rooms, restaurant, athletic 
field, and beautifully landscaped grounds. After a fine Ameri- 
can supper and an ecstatic hot shower I used DDT liberally. 
I spent the night in the tiny but comfortable cell that char- 
acterized the "Y" from Joliet, Illinois, to Japan. 
The next day, when I return ed to the Arab side, came 
reckoning. I had never seen Moustafa so cross. "Where were 
you last night?" he asked in a surly voice. I told him the truth. 
"I understand you, but they don't know you here as I do. 
They think I have brought a spy. I have done my best to ex- 
plain that you are willing to di e with us because you hate the 
Jew. They trust my word, even if they don't trust you. Now 
promise, Artour, you will never go to the YMCA again. If you 
do, it will be the last time. I shall not be responsible for what 
the fanatics do to you. ... By the way, lend me some of 
your DDT." 
I had brought two packages. "This box is for you, Mou- 
stafa." 
The next morning I asked how he had slept. 
"Bless the beard of the American who invented DDT. 
When you meet him, tell him th at I will praise his memory 
forever," Moustafa said gratefully. 
Despite his warning, though I spent most of the day with 
the Arabs, I continued to sleep at the YMCA, sneaking over 
to the Jewish side toward dusk, when danger from snipers was 174 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
greatest, but chances of detection were least. I had no other 
decent place to sleep. At the Os borne House the boys slept on 
lice-ridden mats on a filthy floor, and ate a monotonous diet 
of olives, onions, cheese, and dried bread. I had had enough 
of native life—at least for a while—and once I'd tasted the 
luxury of the YMCA I could not withstand the prospect of an 
appetizing hot meal, a hot shower, and a breakfast of bacon, 
eggs, and coffee. But to appease Moustafa and Faris, I ate 
lunch with the boys, helped clean the place, and told Mou- 
stafa that friends in the Armenian quarter in the Old City 
insisted I sleep with them. 
"After all, Moustafa," I said, "are these not my people, of 
my faith? I have enjoyed your hospitality for many weeks. Let 
me now enjoy the call of blood before the big fighting begins. 
Who knows what Allah will have in store for me by then?" 
My double life had other complications. To the half dozen 
Arab credentials I carried I added a green card from Deir 
Aboutor headquarters stating that I was with the Moustafa el 
Wakil Batallion3 of the Green Shirts, and that my "friend- 
ship to the Arabs has been confirmed on every occasion." 
Another card was from the British Public Information Office, 
press headquarters of the Palestine Mandate Government. In 
addition, it was necessary to obta in permits to enter the vari- 
ous zones into which Jerusalem had been divided by the Brit- 
ish. Later, on May 14, when the Jews took over the Public 
Information Office upon the departure of the British, I added 
a Jewish press pass, and hid my formidable Arabic collection. 
In order not to confuse matters, I kept each set in a differ- 
ent pocket. The scheme worked  well except that sometimes 
in hurry or excitement I forgot  which pocket contained which, 
and more than once at the wrong time was on the point of 
pulling forth a batch of credentials that would have promptly 
settled my undercover activities in a fashion I don't care to 
3 Named after a Green Shirt hero who participated in the pro-Nazi re- 
volt in Iraq, and later escaped to Germany where he died during the war. The 
Green Shirts now regard this Mufti aide and Nazi collaborator as a "saint." The Holy City 175 
think about even now. I was always sure, however, of my 
American passport. As I had the least use for it, I kept it in 
my hip pocket. 
ARAB BATTLE, ARAB FUNERAL 
ON APRIL 8, the morning before my birthday, I returned 
from a night at the "Y," to find Osborne House deserted and 
all the boys gone. A terrific battle for the past five days had 
been raging for Mount Castcl. This was the ruins of an an- 
cient Roman fortress commanding the road over which sup- 
plies from Tel Aviv would come to Jerusalem, and therefore 
was of major importance to both Jews and Arabs. The Jews 
had just launched a major offensiv e against it, and every avail- 
able Arab had been rushed to its defense. Arab boasting had 
not been in vain: they had bottled up the New City, and cut 
it off from the rest of Palestine. The New City's plight was 
desperate. With a population of nearly one hundred thousand 
to feed and defend, it was woefully short of arms, ammuni- 
tion, water, food, medicine, a nd armored transport. Its water 
was pumped from a station at Latrun, in Arab territory, but 
the Arabs had destroyed the machinery. Huge convoys waited 
in Tel Aviv, 45 miles away, ready to pour into the beleaguered 
city with food, water, and materiel—if the Jews could win 
back Castel. The Arabs were dete rmined that they should not. 
On this morning Abdul Kader el Husscini led his men, 
flushed with their victory over the Jewish convoy at Nebi 
Daniel, against the fortress of Castel; a whooping, colorful 
counterattack, a mass charge of 2,500 frenzied Holy Warriors, 
including the Deir Aboutor gang. When I found no one in 
Osborne House, I went down to the Old City; and I was there 
when suddenly everyone began to yell frantically. I thought 
that a prominent Jew had been caught and was about to be 
hanged in public. I dared not ask, as I was alone. Then, to my 176 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
horror, soldiers and civilians alike began to discharge their 
pistols and rifles indiscriminately. Sharpshooters on the walls 
took up the racket. I sought refuge in a doorway. I was con- 
vinced this was no hanging party, but good news of some sort, 
which the Arabs were celebrating in their own peculiar way. 
It was like our Fourth of July—except that live ammunition 
was going off in all directions. What was the good news? I 
stopped a policeman. "Castel! It is ours!" he screamed, and 
fired his pistol, splitting my eardrums. 
Moustafa, Faris, and the others returned to Deir Aboutor 
late in the afternoon, grimy but exalted. I listened to their 
tales of triumph. One would think these two alone had cap- 
tured Castel. Mohammed, one of the fighters, had a wrist 
watch and field glasses he did not have the day before. 
"Where did you get them?" 
"From the Jews." 
"You told me once that Arabs buried dead Jews with their 
rings and watches." 
Everybody laughed. . . . Toward evening they were laugh- 
ing no longer, but on the contrary were as glum as if their 
mothers had died. The Castel victory had been costly. Abdul 
Kader el Husseini, hero of the counterattack, and the only 
man with a personal following in the Jerusalem area, had been 
killed in the action. There was no one else to take his place. 
The funeral would be held tomorrow morning. 
I spent my birthday witnessing that extraordinary spectacle. 
I wore my Mufti button showing the Mufti's turbaned 
head against a background of red, black, and green—the Arab 
colors. Arab tempers were on e dge. An angered mob could be 
dangerous to strangers. I stuck close to Moustafa, and asked 
him to delegate two of the boys to keep an eye on me. I 
sensed the tenseness as Moustafa  and a half dozen of us 
walked through the Old City to the Moslem quarter, where 
the dead chiefs bier rested in his home. The crowd was 
heavily armed, and so thick that there was hardly elbow room. 
Not a single woman was visible. The Holy City 177 
We followed the mourners, walk ing in silence. When the 
crowd turned a corner to Hussei ni's house, I climbed aboard 
an armored car to take pictures. At that moment a volley of 
rifle shots suddenly crackled into the air. I heard shouts: 
"Yahood! Yahood!" Mourning gave way to panic, as practi- 
cally every Arab in the teeming mob of thousands simul- 
taneously let go with pistol or rifle. The bullets hit live electric 
wires, which broke and swung on the road as Arabs tried to 
scramble out of their way. My position atop the car was, to 
say the least, highly untenable. I remember now that a bullet 
whistled past just as I jumped, crawling on all fours toward a 
space between two cars. Everyone was scrambling for safety. 
Within sixty seconds, the streets were completely cleared. 
Arabs were flat against anything that was handy: earth, streets, 
doors, walls. Some were still jumping over fences. It was all 
very undignified for a people who claimed that if they chose 
to spit, they could drown the Jews. Crouching between two 
cars, I managed to take a few pictures. Under each car were 
three Arabs, with others trying to crawl under. Of all the 
bizarre scenes I saw in the Arab world, perhaps this one of 
utter panic, hysteria, and fear was the most comic—and sig- 
nificant. 
What we had all thought was a Haganah attack turned out 
to be a rifle salute in honor of the dead commander. When 
they began shouting this intelligence, I saw Moustafa crawling 
from under the armored car, dusting himself with an air of 
embarrassment. I showed him my scraped shinbone. 
As the funeral cortege came around the bend I lost Mou- 
stafa. The boys assigned to guard  me had bravely disappeared 
during the melee. I was alone. Fortunately, when I got on a 
high wall to shoot pictures, I met two Armenian boys. They 
accompanied me as we followed the cortege. Husseini's coffin, 
covered with a red, black, and green flag, was carried to the 
square below the Dome of the Rock, where Arab chiefs spoke 
their eulogies. All this took place within sight of the Wailing 
Wall. The bier was then lifted by the pallbearers and the final Z78 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
procession began. Passing under banners of Arab flags, and 
waved on by palm leaves, the coffin was borne slowly away. 
I was now before the entrance of the Dome of the Rock, 
one of Islam's holiest shrines. Standing near by was a short, 
plump, round-faced man with a magnificent spade-shaped 
white beard and an enormous white turban, who was the 
custodian, Sheikh Ismail el Ansary. I asked in Turkish if I 
might enter and pay my respects to the Prophet. Fingering his 
beads, he led me into the octa gonal, exquisitely ornate mosque 
that had been built by Byzantine artists on the model of the 
Church of the Ascension. In the half-light of latticed and 
stained-glass windows, I saw magnificently tinted columns 
that had once graced the Temple of Jerusalem in Roman 
times. Others were from Christian churches of the Byzantine 
era, as attested to by signs of the Cross. 
Directly under the enormous dome, enclosed within a high 
fence, was a huge black slab of rock, glowing darkly as it re- 
flected the subdued rays streaming through the stained glass. 
It was to this rock that Mohammed was supposed to have 
arrived in one day from M ecca—hundreds of miles away— 
by flying on his winged horse, El Burak. It is said that he 
prayed on this rock, then, moun ting the steed, flew to heaven. 
Historically the rock was actually a jagged slice of Mount 
Moriah, the hill on which Abraha m offered to sacrifice Isaac. 
The Jews prayed on it long before the Moslem dome cov- 
ered it. 
Solomon built his magnificent Temple here and housed in 
it the Jewish holy of holies, the Ark of the Covenant. The en- 
tire area of the mosque, and the spacious stone courtyard sur- 
rounding it, were built on the site of the ancient Tsrael courts, 
where Christ preached and drove away the money-changers. 
Hardly a square inch here was without some direct connection 
to ancient Hebraic or Christian history. 
None of these Hebraic-Christian origins, however, could be 
mentioned to Sheikh Ansary. He disliked Americans for their 
support of the partition  of Pal estine,  but he  apparently The Holy City 179 
thought me sufficiently "un-American" to invite me to his 
room after my visit to the Dome . It was a large igloo-like stone 
guardhouse, next to one of the porticos. Sitting on a colorful 
settee, he offered me the choice of bitter Arab coffee or sweet- 
ened tea. 
After I had gained his confidence, El Ansary proved unusu- 
ally outspoken. "Look here"—these were the only English 
words he knew—"whenever I pray, I pray to Allah to destroy 
the Jews. I pray to Allah to punish President Truman because 
he has been on the Zionist side. I used to pray against Presi- 
dent Roosevelt, a very bad man. Now I pray to Allah that he 
destroy Mrs. Roosevelt because she is behaving very badly 
toward the Arabs." 
"You sound like a Moslem Republican," I said. 
"Look here, I pray against them for different reasons. 
Against Balfour and his family I pray that Allah confine 
them all to hell. The English are like sarratan [cancer]. May 
Balfour and Roosevelt take first place in hell. Allah, Allah, 
may this be done." 
Propriety demanded that I say: "Insh'allah." 
Despite his sixty-eight years, the man was as vigorous as an 
ox. "Look here, I will fight for Palestine to the last minute of 
my life," he said, with eyes blazing. "No Moslem is afraid of 
death. If he dies for Palestine that is a satisfying way to die. 
His parents are happy he fell in the Jehad". If we cannot win 
any other way, all the sheikhs in all the mosques in all the 
Arab countries over all the world will climb the minarets, and 
call on every Moslem to join the Jehad against the Jew in 
Palestine." 
I turned the conversation to the Mufti. 
"Look here," said El Ansary, "he is of the same blood as 
Mohammed. He is respected for his many good deeds. I pray 
for the Mufti in all my prayers to Allah." 
I thanked Sheikh el Ansary for his courtesy and, according 
to decorum, wished him long life and the blessings of Allah 
on him, his family, and his heirs. Bowing, I salaamed by plac- 180 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ing my fingertips first to my heart, then to my lips, my fore- 
head. He did the same in token of his respect toward me. 
"I shall remember you in my prayers to Allah," he said. 
UNHOLY CITY 
LATE in the afternoon I met Moustafa in Deir Aboutor. He 
was glum. 
"What's the matter?" 
"Castel. The Jews got Castel back early this morning," 
Moustafa said. 
Overnight the fortunes of war had changed. With the cap- 
ture of Castel the Jews had opened the road to Tel Aviv, and 
hundreds of convoys poured into Jerusalem with sorely needed 
food, medical supplies, and arms. The Arabs later recaptured 
Castel, but that brief respite helped Jerusalem immensely in 
this period. 
"What are we going to do now, Moustafa?" 
"Faris and T are going back to Cairo to buy heavy guns. We 
need them badly." 
I thought quickly. I would prefer to remain in Jerusalem 
and wait for Moustafa and Faris to return. But the idea of 
running guns from Egypt to Palestine excited and challenged 
me. Where were the Arabs getting their guns? Who was sup- 
plying them? How would they smuggle them into Palestine? 
And what role was the Mufti—in Cairo—playing? I wanted 
desperately to meet him. . . . I spoke up: 
"I'll come along. Remember our pledge: wherever you go, 
I follow." 
It took several days for Faris to borrow capital to pay for the 
guns he expected to buy, and to make other arrangements. In 
the meantime Captain Zaki and the other Green Shirts we 
had left in Beersheba had managed to hitch-hike to Deir The Holy City 181 
Aboutor and join us. Zaki was placed in charge of Osborne 
House while we prepared to leave for Cairo. 
But before we left Jerusalem  two outrages—one Jewish, the 
other Arab—shocked the conscience of every decent Jew, 
Christian, and Moslem. The first occurred at Deir Yassin a 
small Arab village on the outskirts of Jerusalem. For years the 
Arabs there had lived at peace with the Jews. Then suddenly 
the Arabs began to snipe and stage vicious attacks on isolated 
Jewish settlements. After several warnings the Stern group 
told the Arabs to evacuate th eir women and children because 
it intended to retaliate in ki nd. The Arabs refused, counting 
on the presence of women and children to prevent the Jews 
from attacking. The Sternists, in turn, believing the families 
had been evacuated, staged an all-out attack, determined to 
silence those Arabs who had been massacring Jews for weeks. 
When the Arabs put up stiff r esistance, the Sternists called 
in the Irgun, whereupon the Arab warriors fled. In the melee, 
the innocent suffered: the women,  the children, the aged. The 
slaughter reached a toll of 150. Bodies were piled on street 
corners. Others were thrown in to wells. Despite the heat of 
war, the massacre was as senseless as it was hideous. Every Jew 
I met was horrified and ashamed. The fact that this was the 
only instance of its kind in the history of Jewish-Arab rela- 
tions, or that the Arab leaders of Deir Yassin had been 
warned to evacuate their women and children, does not excuse 
its vindictiveness. 
The dark gods that guided the destinies of the Holy City 
took quick revenge. On April 1 3  a  convoy of nurses, doctors, 
medical students and scholars set out for the Hebrew Uni- 
versity and the Hadassah Hospital on Mount Scopus, above 
Jerusalem. The British had been duly informed of the non- 
military nature of the convoy, and the Jews had requested 
their protection. But instead of the British, the Arabs came— 
hundreds of veterans of Nebi Daniel and Mount Castel. First 
they set up roadblocks, then they knocked out the first in the 182 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
convoy of four armored buses. For seven hours the Arabs bat- 
tered the helpless victims with grenades, Bren guns, Molotov 
cocktails. They set two cars on fire, shooting down those who 
crawled out. Among the seventy-seven who perished were 
men eminent in Palestine science: Dr. Chaim Yasky, director 
of the Hadassah Hospital; Dr. Mizurky, cancer specialist; Dr. 
Benjamin Klar, philologist; Dr . Abraham Freimann, authority 
on Jewish law; Doljansky and Ben-David of the Faculty of 
Medicine, who had treated many Arabs. 
British police watched as the sl aughter went on. When it 
was nearly over, they laid down  a smoke screen, drove off the 
Arabs, and arranged for a truce,  Then they carried off the 
survivors—28 out of 105! 
Later, the Arabs disclosed that  they had been falsely in- 
formed of "large concentrati ons of Jewish bands gathering 
near the Hospital and Univers ity." Who had informed them? 
I heard the answer everywhere among the Arabs at Deir 
Aboutor: 
"El Ingleez!" The English!" 
Whether Arab massacred Jew, or Jew massacred Arab, was 
of little moment. I felt that neither the Jew nor the Moslem 
was basically at fault here. They were victims of a conspiracy 
beyond their scope, and at this stage, their inflamed passions 
made a peaceful ending impossible. Neither Arabs nor Jews, 
but pagans, had made the Ho ly City impure and unholy—a 
city whose revered memory was blasphemed most by those 
making the greatest pretense to piety and democracy. 
The next day I left with Moustafa and Faris for Cairo. (CHAPTER X) 
GUN-RUNNING! 
"Eighteen pounds," the gun merchant said, expect- 
ing to get fifteen. 
"That is cheap" Faris whispered. "Buy it." 
"Ten pounds" I offered. 
"Sixteen and it is yours." 
"Ten," I said. 
"It cost me fifteen, I swear by Allah." 
"It's worth no more than ten pounds," I insisted, 
and made a move to leave. 
I finally bought it for eleven pounds. 
IT WAS no joy ride. The distance from Jerusalem to Cairo 
was about three hundred miles, the greater part of it over 
desert. Our transportation on the first leg of our journey was 
a hired open truck with rickety sidings, filled with ten large 
drums of gasoline and six crates of oranges, which Faris pro- 
posed to sell in Beersheba to get additional money for guns. 
All the drums leaked and the floor of the truck was already 
drenched when I clambered on board. I didn't think gas- 
soaked oranges would taste good, but it was none of my busi- 
ness. 
I was dressed appropriately: my khaffiya about my face, my 
Green Shirt armband in place, my Arab credentials carefully 
placed where I could get at them  quickly. My job was to sit 184 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
in the back and watch the drums. Moustafa and Faris sat in 
front with the driver, guns poised against snipers and hold-up 
men. Gasoline was scarce and the cargo valuable. We were 
particularly jittery as we approached the Jewish settlement 
near Rachel's tomb, Kibbutz Ramat Rachel. Our truck 
stopped, and Moustafa, to guard against attack from Jewish 
snipers, climbed with his mach ine-gun into the back with me. 
Then our truck made a frenzied dash, madly careening and 
zigzagging from one side of the ro ad to the other to spoil the 
aim of sharpshooters. The dr ums slammed and bounced to- 
gether with a frightful racket, causing them to leak all the 
more. One of them nearly pinned me to the side and another 
almost smashed my hand as I tried to keep them together. I 
gave up finally and held on to the sidings, never sure whether 
I'd be ripped off with them at the next turn. I could see it was 
going to be an exciting ride back to Cairo. 
We roared by the kibbutz in a cloud of dust. No snipers 
shot at us. 
"You are brave, like a soldier," Moustafa said, as we slowed 
down at a safe distance and he climbed back into the front 
seat. 
We stopped to pick up hitch-hikers. Later on, we picked 
up more, ragged ruffians all. Now I had the added responsi- 
bility of keeping Arabs from pilfering oranges. It was not an 
easy task to instruct loot-mad  cutthroats on the proprieties of 
ownership. Suddenly I caught one of them smoking a ciga- 
rette, seated atop the leaking gasoline drums. He had smoked 
it more than halfway before I saw what he was doing. If I 
were an Arab I'd have struck him. 
I grabbed the cigarette out of his mouth and tossed it into 
the road. 
"Ahbal! Ahbal! Fool!" I ye lled over and over. The moron 
shrugged his shoulders. 
We passed Bethlehem and neared Kibbutz Kfar Etzion 
with about twenty gas-splatte red hitch-hikers perched like Gun-Running! 185 
buzzards all over the truck. That it held together was a tribute 
to the genius of its American maker. Five hundred yards from 
Kfar Etzion we halted again: tracer bullets from the Jews 
would have blown us all sky hi gh. We waited for an armored 
car to come along and act as military escort for us until we 
passed the Jewish settlement. Pr esently one came roaring be- 
hind us. We let it go ahead and followed close behind. Be- 
yond the settlement the road sloped. Down the hill we now 
dashed in a mad, suicidal flight  at some seventy miles an hour. 
I wondered which would be easier—crashing or roasting to 
death. To my surprise we ran this gauntlet, too, without a 
shot. To my greater surprise, the truck still held together. I 
thought the Jews were asleep at Kfar Etzion, but I soon 
learned they were holding their fire for bigger game. 
Just as we reached the bottom of  the grade, we met a large 
convoy led by four armed truc ks bristling with King Abdul- 
lah's British-trained, British-financed Arab Legionnaires. They 
were followed by a dozen mammoth trucks, carrying thou- 
sands of gallons of gasoline in tins. A half dozen trucks filled 
with more Legion troops brought up the rear. 
We met the convoy a minute after running the Jewish 
gauntlet. As the armored trucks reached the hilltop we had 
just left, the Jews opened with a barrage. Watching the battle 
from a safe distance, I realized suddenly that our truck had 
missed being caught in the line of fire, let alone risking a 
head-on smashup on the narrow road, by a matter of seconds! 
As the Jews began to fire, the convoy stopped, and the 
armored cars began firing. With a display of excellent dis- 
cipline and marksmanship, the Arab Legion scored four hits 
on the Jewish stronghold. Kfar Et zion guns were silenced in 
clouds of dust, smoke, and debris. The fight was over in a half 
hour and the convoy resumed its journey. I saw one Arab ve- 
hicle smoking. Three Arabs were reported dead. While the 
fighting was going on, Moustafa and I ran over freshly plowed 
fields to get a closer view. But we dared move only when we 186 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
saw a protecting rockpile or fence. By the time we arrived, the 
convoy was well on its way. We hailed a small armored car to 
drive us back to our truck. 
As Moustafa scrambled into the car, I barely squeezed in 
after him. I found myself sitting on what I presumed was 
someone's leg. When I turned to beg his pardon, I found the 
man dead. He was an Arab Legionnaire propped up against a 
tire. At first I saw only his arm. Then I saw that he had been 
shot through the left temple, and the blood had clotted over 
his face and eyeball. His mouth was partly open, but I could 
see no teeth. A small white bandage, thrown over his head, 
had become saturated with his blood. The pallor of death had 
already set in. I looked around. Exactly thirteen of us were 
jammed tightly inside the sweating interior of the car. To my 
right was a veiled woman. Her hands were bloody and she was 
weeping. 
"Was he your son?" I asked in broken Arabic. 
"La, no," she said, and indicated that she had bloodied her 
hands helping him into the truck. 
The Legionnaire was the first dead man I had ever touched. 
The soldier's legs wobbled grot esquely against mine, and the 
horribly mutilated face stared vacantly in the hot, cramped 
confines of the armored car. We reached Faris, who was 
waiting for us in our truck. 
We continued south, toward the Negev, driving across 
lands now waste, but which could easily bloom—not by 
insh'allah, or by agricultural methods pre-dating Mohammed 
—but by toil, by planning, by science, by water. We passed 
small herds of bearded black goats tended by young boys in 
rags. We came to what I thought at first was a rubble heap. It 
turned out to be a native mud village. Hordes of children 
swarmed across our path, follo wed by mangy dogs. Once again 
we passed the telephone lines, stripped of copper, swinging 
pathetically in the hot wind. Gun-Running! 187 
TWO ARMENIANS IN THE NEGEV 
WE ARRIVED in Beersheba in the afternoon, exhausted, 
dusty, and smelly. Faris, good as his promise, promptly sold 
the oranges and the gasoline at a good profit and added the 
money to his gun fund. The hired truck went back to Jerusa- 
lem. For lunch we were again invited by the mayor for a meal 
of pilav and lamb. Sitting at my right was a gray-haired man 
with a worried face. His features, tempered by suffering, were 
not Arabic, though he was da rk-skinned and unshaven. We 
had been talking in Turkish. The man ate with unusual gusto. 
"He cats almost like a starving Armenian," I said to myself. 
S o m e t h i n g  i n  m e  c l i c k e d .  ... I  l o o k e d  a g a i n  a t  h i s  f ace, es- 
pecially the eyes. 
"Hye yes? Are you Armenian?" I asked. 
The man almost choked. He stared at me in my khaffiya, 
my armband, my deeply tanned face, and gasped: 
"Toun Hye yes? Are you Armenian?" 
I laughed. "Ayo. Dzo hoss inch guness gor? Yes. What are 
you doing here?" 
"Yev toun inch guness gor ass anabadin metch? And what 
are you doing in this desert?" 
His name was Iskender Demirjian and he was a miller. For 
fourteen years he had ground grain for Bedouins. A refugee 
from the Turkish massacres, he had lived in Jerusalem, and 
saved his money. Seeing that Arab women still ground their 
wheat by methods older than Mohammed, the enterprising 
Armenian had built a mill, inst alled the machinery, and was 
earning a good living. His mill was out in the parched desert, 
at a Bedouin crossroads. Now he was in town to buy gasoline 
and was going back in the afternoon. 
"Moustafa, meet another good Ar ab, an Armenian. He will 
give us a ride." 
"Ahh, an Armenian—bravest of brave he-men, boldest of 188 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the bold, generous to a friend, merciless to a foe. They shall 
always have a place of honor at my table." 
If you gave Moustafa something—anything to eat, to drink, 
to wear, he sang your praises like a poet. I would treat him to 
dinner just to hear him perorate on my people. Most Arabs 
are poetic. The language has nuances of grace and beauty, and 
powers of expression beside which English is stiff, stilted, 
bony, and barren. 
The Armenian did not have his own truck. Someone was 
driving him back with three drums of gasoline the Armenian 
had bought and sacks of grai n for milling. We hopped on, 
preferring to sit tete-a-tete on the grain sacks, instead of up 
front. 
The Negev stretched around us like an undulating desert 
sea. The Armenian began to talk, not of chit-chat, or about 
wanting to come to America, but of what he had long kept 
pent up. 
"What a strange and stubborn pe ople we are," he began. 
"How many thousands of years old we are I do not know.1 
Genesis speaks of us. We had a civilization and an alphabet 
while England was a forest. Our kingdom reached from Ararat 
to the Black Sea and down to the Mediterranean. A thousand 
years now we have been a people governed by Tartars, Mon- 
gols, Seljuks, Arabs, Persians, Turks, Russians. Before them it 
was the Greeks and Romans who tried to assimilate us. They" 
—the Armenian chuckled at this—"always choked when they 
tried it. We bent, yes, but inside remained like steel. We as- 
similated some of the best traits of the conquering visitors, 
which made us hardy and impossible to destroy. The Turk 
made the most ambitious attempt to exterminate us—mas- 
sacring 1,300,000. But look how we've bred like jack-rabbits. 
1 The Armenians are regarded by an thropologists as a Western people. 
The language, non-Semitic, belongs to the Indo-European family. Armenians 
originally emigrated from the Alpine re gions of southern Europe and settled 
in the plateaus of Asia Minor, reaching to the Caucasus areas. Mainly because 
of their Christianity, they kept in c onstant touch with, and were continually 
nourished by, Western thought and culture. Gun-Running! 189 
Today there arc 3,250,000 of us—indestructible as God's Law. 
My friend, if anybody survives atomic warfare it will be the 
Armenian." 
We burst out in laughter. 
"They speak of us as an Eastern people, but our culture is 
a hybrid of West and the residue of civilizations—East and 
West—that crisscrossed our country. Our religion and lan- 
guage are Western. Our feelings for democracy are Western. 
Others boast of their martyrs:  a thousand and one publicized 
saints, with more manufactured every year. How about the 
tens of thousands of Armenians who chose death instead of 
conversion to Islam? They perished to keep Christ's holy 
flame burning. These are the real martyrs—the unsung saints, 
known but to God, unknown to your Western journals. Chris- 
tianity with us has been no luxury. It was as hard to cling to as 
life itself, but as long as we kept Him, He kept us." 
The words seemed to pour out of the Armenian. 
"See those mounds, those hills?" He pointed with a 
gnarled hand. "If they could speak they would call out their 
names: Boghos, Avedis, Antranik, Hagop, Stepan, Sumpad! 
Armenians are buried everywhere on this desert around us. 
They fought with the Allies—with the English and the 
French in World War I to help liberate the Arabs from the 
Turks. Where did it get us, my friend? Here, there, under 
those mounds—death. We marched into Jerusalem with Al- 
lenby.2 The dead piled on the dead. We have fertilized the 
ground for the ambitions of this big power or that. You re- 
member, do you not, how the English and the French de- 
serted us in Turkey in 1921 and 1922, and looked the other 
2 Marshal Allenby's assault on Beersheba in October 1917 enabled him 
to liberate the rest of Palestine from the Turks and capture Jerusalem two 
months later. About 75,000 members of  the Armenian Legion of Volunteers 
died on the Arab and European fronts, fighting with the Allies. 
A former United States consul-general, George Horton, wrote of these 
and other experiences in The Blight of  Asia, An Account of the Systematic 
Extermination of Christian Populations by Mohammedans and of the Culpabil- 
ity of Certain Great Powers (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill; 1926).  190 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
way while Kemal—with French and British arms—massacred 
those Armenians who had survived six years of massacre. Who 
came from the West to count the Greeks, Armenians, and 
other Christians massacred by Kemal? Where was their grati- 
tude? Except for help from Amer ica, where were the sweet 
words of the other Powers? Ah, they call to you only when 
they can make use of you." 
We arrived at a cluster of bui ldings in the parched dust- 
bowl. 
"This is my home," the Armenian said. "Come, meet my 
family." 
He had one daughter and four sons, one of whom had mar- 
ried an Arab girl. All five, together with the mother and fa- 
ther, had "Armenian eyes." One can recognize them easily. It 
isn't that they're large, or oval, or sad. It isn't a physical 
quality that differentiates them. Look in the eyes of a man 
who has suffered yet never lost faith in his Creator, in man, 
or in himself; one who has lived among the dying, laughed 
among the weeping, sung among the songless, a refugee for a 
thousand years—and who today looks on life's adventure hun- 
grily and excitedly, and you will have found "Armenian eyes." 
We found the Demirjians living like Arabs, except that 
their home was far cleaner. The entire family—save the son 
who had married a Bedouin—slept in one large room, at one 
end of which was a bed for the elder Demirjians. The "chil- 
dren," all of them now grown to full manhood and woman- 
hood, slept on rush mats next to their parents' bed. They 
brought us coffee, and cool water from the well. They urged us 
to stay for supper and spend the night with them, as was the 
custom of the desert. Moustafa gave a peroration on the heroic 
qualities of the Armenian male, but he was too much of an 
Arab to include the Armenian woman, whose role has often 
been equally heroic in the pr eservation of the race. A truck 
loaded with flour was going toward Cairo, so Moustafa, Faris, 
and I decided to get on it. 
"Yallah!" Gun-Running! 191 
The road was a thin, pale, yellow ribbon snaking through 
the wilderness of sand, scrub, and stone. For miles before and 
behind there was nothing but pa rched earth and wadics. I was 
hatless, bouncing in the truck, up and down, and from side to 
side. How scorchingly the sun beat down! It seared my tongue 
into a dull, dead weight rolling in my mouth. It burned my 
eyes with the flame of a torch. It cracked open my lips as the 
earth around me was cracked open. This was no longer the 
Negev of Palestine. We had left  Palestine and were in Egypt. 
The frontier was behind us somewhere on the steaming sands. 
This was the Sinai wilderness through which the ancient Jews 
wandered for forty years! 
ABDOU HABI—MAY HIS TRIBE DECREASE! 
AT NINE P.M. we reached the Suez Canal and the Ismailia 
Customs Office. Now we ran into a difficulty of which, this 
time, I was the direct cause. I had brought $380 in cash with 
me. Despite Moustafa's warning not to state the full amount 
I declared it all. Fans did not divulge the hundreds of pounds 
he had brought to buy guns. I had no cause to lie. Besides, if 
the official hated Americans, Armenians, or journalists, he 
might take a notion to search me and confiscate any sum 
above the declared amount. I told the truth—$380 in cash. 
"May I see the money?" the official asked. I produced the 
money, expecting him to count it. Instead, he laid it aside 
tenderly, and turned to other matters. After ten minutes of 
waiting I said: "Count my money, please, and give me a re- 
ceipt." 
"Shuweiya. Shuweiya. Take it easy. Take it easy." 
He opened the right-hand drawer of his desk, and moved to 
put the money in. 
"Please count the money, now, in my presence," I insisted. 
Abdou Habi—never will I forget the name, may his tribe 192 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
decrease—put the greenbacks on the desk. He claimed he 
didn't know what to do. He had never seen so many dollars 
before. He would wait till morning, and ask his chief, in the 
meanwhile keeping possession of the uncounted dollars. We 
were anxious to get to Cairo th at night and were in no mood 
for delay. 
"Telephone your chief and ask him what to do. That's sim- 
ple enough." 
Abdou Habi said he did not wish to disturb His Excellency 
at this hour. 
There were six of us in th e wooden shack that was the 
customs office—five Arabs, one  American. The dollars, still 
uncounted, were on the desk with a paperweight over them. 
Abdou left his desk. I walked over to Moustafa, standing 
some feet away, to ask his advice, when suddenly the lights 
went out, plunging the shack into darkness. 
"The money! The money!" I yelled, and hurled myself at 
the desk. 
Long experience in photographic darkrooms has given me a 
sense of direction in the dark; almost instantly I located the 
pile of dollars and placed my hand firmly over it. A split sec- 
ond later I felt a pair of mois t fat hands crawling over mine. 
At that instant someone lit a match. A nose's distance from 
my face was the face of Abdou Habi. 
No doubt about it now. Everyone sensed Habi's game. A 
clamor arose to count the money immediately. I demanded 
the phone to call the American ambassador. Moustafa began 
to shout the names of Egypt's cabinet ministers and army gen- 
erals he claimed to know. Habi was thoroughly intimidated. 
He suddenly decided that we might perhaps risk disturbing 
His Excellency. Habi wanted to carry the money, but I re- 
fused to give it up until he agreed to count it then and there. 
After that I permitted him to  pocket the bills, and asked 
Moustafa to sit next to him and let his pistol press against the 
would-be thief. The customs chief was cordial, apologized for Gun-Running! 193 
the "misunderstanding," carefully  counted my money, and 
gave me a certification that I had brought in $380. 
We arrived in Cairo shortly after midnight, and went to the 
Gloria, a native hotel where the three of us shared a large 
room. Never was a bed more we lcome. Scorched, blistered, 
and wracked by the day's events, I sank into bed, my money 
belt around my waist. Inside it also were my Madonna, St. 
Christopher's Medal, and mezuzah, inseparably together. 
GUN-BUYING 
THE next morning Moustafa, Fa ris and I called on a haber- 
dashery dealer. The haberdasher dr ove us in a French car five 
miles out, across a railroad crossing, and slowed down when 
we came to a long, high mud fence surrounding a spacious 
house. There was a guardhouse at the corner, then another 
entrance, through which we drove  into a large garden. The 
trio went in. I remained outside talking in Turkish to one of 
the men. "Where do you get the guns and ammunition?" 
I asked. 
"Why do you ask such questions?" 
"Our boys would like to get them as cheaply as possible by 
going to the source. The need in  Palestine is desperate, and 
money is hard to get." 
The man wasn't impressed. "I do not know you," he said, 
and kept watching me. 
Moustafa and the others came down the stairs, toting two 
heavy, low-slung guns. I must confess to more than ordinary 
stupidity on such matters. Moustafa said they were anti-tank 
guns. The smaller of the two was priced at $250, the larger at 
$400. Both were rusty and struck me as terribly overpriced. 
Both were "asking" prices, which in the Orient seldom have 
any relation to the actual sales price. We all went into a side 194 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
door to stare at stack after stack of packed hand-grenades and 
mortar shells. 
Moustafa asked if the ammunition was still alive. 
"Guaranti. Guaranti," the salesman assured him. 
That afternoon Moustafa a nd Fans went gun-shopping 
again but did not take me along. Apparently I had shown 
undue curiosity. I was itching to learn the major gun-sources 
and other data. Laboriously pieci ng together tidbits, I ascer- 
tained that Cairo was bristling with undercover arms and am- 
munition. Some of the material had been dug out of the El 
Alamein sands and was German . Considerable quantities had 
been stolen from British camps or  sold by British soldiers to 
Arabs. Franco's arms salesmen were active. Italian, Swiss, Bel- 
gian, and Czechoslovakian agents were also in the market. 
Nothing American was for sale except some rifles and a few 
revolvers. Rifles sold from $65 to $100, depending on the 
condition and type. Revolvers brought from $25 to $40. Bren 
and Vickers machine-guns ranged from $200 to $350, "asking" 
prices. 
A few days later Moustafa said: "I saw Faris pay three hun- 
dred dollars for guns today." 
I did not press him and feigned no interest. Moustafa was 
probably telling the truth but I did not want to arouse any 
more suspicion than I had so far. Moustafa and Faris made 
matters no easier for me when th ey repeatedly told me that 
they had been seeing the Mufti, whom I was so eager to meet. 
The Mufti was everywhere, behind nearly every major Arab 
action, yet he never appeared publicly and few knew his head- 
quarters. He remained mysterious, inscrutable, invisible as 
ever. 
I became particularly alarmed at reports reaching me 
through Green Shirt scouts that the Ikhwan had warned 
Jerusalem Arabs to do away with me quietly: I was not to be 
trusted. The plan was to pers uade me to accompany a volun- 
teer gang on one of their numerous raids. I was to be killed 
either "accidentally" or by " Jewish bullets." I didn't know Gun-Running! 195 
whether Labib Bey (a mutual dislike had developed between 
us) had given the order or whether it came from Sheikh 
Hassan el Banna himself. It might well come from either if 
they checked with their friends  in the United States. At any 
rate, I kept to our room during most of my stay in Cairo, 
avoiding everyone I had formerly seen except Ahmed Hussein 
and the Green Shirts. I could not help asking Hussein, casu- 
ally: "Do you hear anything from Katibah or Richardson 
these days?" He said he had received no word from them. I 
thought he was telling the truth but I was not sure. I could 
not get rid of the added suspicion that it was the Green Shirts 
who had warned the Jerusalem Ar abs against me, and that to 
throw me off the scent th ey accused the Ikhwan. 
Cairo had changed for the worse in the two weeks I had 
been away. The drums of war were no longer muffled. The 
city was in a particularly ugly mood. It had just gone through 
a disastrous police strike that had been suppressed by violent 
army action. Hardly had the city recovered when 1,300 male 
nurses of Cairo's two leading hospitals had struck, causing the 
death of many patients. The government had withheld the 
facts by announcing that the publication of details would be 
"considered a serious crime." I sensed the mood of city-wide 
terror, especially on Friday afte rnoons when the faithful were 
exhorted from the mosques by fanatic sheikhs of El Azhar. 
I missed the experience of going around with Moustafa and 
Faris on their gun-hunting missions, but I learned to know 
Faris better and to distrust him. I felt intuitively that he was 
being underhanded. I was convinced that he was trying to set 
Moustafa against me. I had to put an end to this. 
Lunching alone with Moustafa one day, I said: "I'd like you 
to buy me a gun for my personal use against the Jews." 
Moustafa looked surprised, then broke into a smile. "I keep 
telling Faris you are on Allah's si de, but he won't believe me. 
This will convince him." 
"A rifle is too bulky, a pistol too weak. Get me a Sten in good 
condition." 196 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I talked it over with Faris that night. Moustafa had en- 
trusted him with six hundred dollars, borrowing from his rela- 
tives by pledging them his share of his father's estate. "Give 
me £20," Faris said. "I will buy the gun and have it delivered 
to Jerusalem." 
"A gun is like a suit of clothes," I said. "I must see it and 
like it." 
The next morning he took me in  a taxi to a native quarter, 
entered a house and walked through  it to a shed in the back- 
yard. Here were all kinds of weapons: I inspected them, but 
professed not to like their condition. We took a taxi to a car- 
penter shop. In the rear were half a dozen Sten guns. I chose 
one. 
"Eighteen pounds," the gun merchant said, expecting to 
get fifteen. 
"That is cheap," Faris whispered. "Buy it." He expected a 
commission. 
"Ten pounds," I offered. 
"Sixteen and it is yours." 
"Ten," I said. 
"It cost me fifteen, I swear by Allah." 
"It's worth no more than ten pounds," I insisted, and made 
a move to leave. 
I finally bought it for eleven pounds. 
AT THE MUFTI'S HIDEOUT 
"I'LL store this with our other guns," Faris said as soon as we 
left the shop. 
"I must come with you and store it personally," I insisted. 
Faris had brought along a Sten and a revolver. We all got 
in a taxi, and laid the armaments on the floor. "Yallah!" 
We drove to the outskirts of Cairo. The taxi stopped in 
front of a secluded, run-down house buried behind a fence Gun-Running! 197 
and almost hidden by vines and shrubbery. A lone man sat on 
the porch. As we opened the iron gate he sprang to his feet. 
Recognizing Moustafa and Fa ns he put down his gun and 
welcomed us. We were not allowed to go inside. Instead, two 
men came out, inspected our guns and said they needed minor 
repairs to which they would attend. 
As soon as the repairs were done they'd be sent to El Arish 
(just this side of the Palestine border, and the assembly point 
for government troops) and there picked up by the owners. 
We got receipts for the guns, then  we got into a taxi again, 
and drove on. 
"That house is a depot for guns and ammunition. It's a very 
secret place." 
"Whose place is it, Moustafa?" 
"The Mufti's!" 
Faris turned to me, after a moment, and said: "We have a 
surprise for you." 
I completely distrusted the man. "What is it?" 
"You will learn very soon." 
We had been riding for about five minutes through typical 
native quarters, when I noticed suddenly that wc were driving 
down a dirt road ending with a roadblock of large gasoline- 
drums filled with cement. Around them, at the entrances to 
several spacious houses, were armed guards and plainclothes- 
men. It was a military headquarters of some kind. The taxi 
stopped short of the roadblock, and we got out. 
Moustafa leaned over toward me. "Don't speak English," 
he whispered. 
We dismissed the driver, and wa lked into a yard, then onto 
a porch. 
"Where are we, Moustafa?" 
"At the Mufti's headquarters. We are going to try to have 
him see you." 
I crossed my fingers, and waited. The two went inside and 
soon emerged with a dark-haired, sharp-featured young man 
who spoke excellent English. 198 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Why do you wish to see His Eminence?" he asked. 
"I have admired him for ten years. To travel to Egypt with- 
out seeing our Grand Mufti would be like coming to Cairo 
and not visiting the Pyramids." 
"All the American journalists want to see him. He has re- 
fused them all." 
"Don't confuse me with them. They all work for the Jewish 
press." 
"I will see. Wait here. But I warn you, don't walk around. 
The guards don't know you." 
Ten minutes later the young man returned to the porch 
and escorted me past a long dr iveway. The entrance was clut- 
tered with police and detectives. The driveway led into a 
house set well back from the road—the Mufti's headquarters 
at 12 Kemal street in the Hilmia Zeitoun section outside 
Cairo. My guide led me to th e adjoining building, where he 
introduced me to Jacob Khoury, one of the Mufti's many 
secretaries. I was asked to wait downstairs. 
After an hour, Moustafa and Faris joined me. Khoury told 
us to call tomorrow. We came again, and once again. Each 
time Moustafa and Faris would see the Mufti while I waited, 
fuming. I did not meet the Mufti in Cairo. I had to postpone 
that experience until later. 
GUNS—FOR ALLAH AND FOR PROFIT 
IN THE taxi Faris asked me fo r a loan of fifty dollars. Was 
this to be the price demanded for the arrangement to meet 
the Mufti? And if I refused would Faris blackmail me? My 
dislike for him grew hourly. 
"Why do you want fifty dollars?" I asked. 
"To buy more guns at bargain prices. I will pay you back in 
Jerusalem." Gun-Running! 199 
I could see now that I should not have declared my $380. 
Faris knew I couldn't have spent it all in the ten days we had 
been in Cairo. He was beginning to shake me down. 
"I have no money on me/' I said. "I'll let you know to- 
night." 
"Why does he want the money?" I asked Moustafa, later. 
"For guns," he said. "I have given him much money of my 
own. He has promised to pay it back when we sell the guns in 
Jerusalem." 
"I'll give him the money onl y because you have trusted 
Faris." 
That night I turned over to Faris the equivalent of fifty 
dollars in Egyptian funds. 
He put his arm around my shoulder. "Look, Artour, I'll buy 
you a Bren gun that you can sell in Jerusalem for three times 
the price. Guns are cheap here. They are very expensive in 
Jerusalem." He winked. 
"Is that what you're planning to do with the guns you've 
bought?" I asked. 
"Of course. I expect to sell every gun at double and triple 
the price." 
"Then you're buying guns as a business, and not ... for 
other reasons?" 
"Well, other reasons, too, but there's good profit in buying 
guns cheap here and selling them dear in Jerusalem. Every- 
body wants guns there." 
Faris' gun racket caused me to look on him with renewed 
distrust. I knew now he'd never repay the fifty dollars. I didn't 
mind. It was the cheapest, and the only way to buy my se- 
curity. I was equally convinced I'd never see the Sten gun I 
had bought "for my personal u se." I had never intended to 
use it. To begin with I didn't know how, and had no desire to 
learn. I had bought it to reinstate myself with Faris and Mou- 
stafa. I was convinced that Faris would find a way to cheat 
Moustafa of the money he had loaned him. I didn't disclose 200 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
my suspicions, because if the two got to quarreling, they 
would split company, and I needed the services of both to 
return safely to Jerusalem. 
We were due to leave in a few days. On Palm Sunday I 
went to the Armenian Church in  Cairo. I felt the need for 
meditation. In our Church there are no one-hour-on-the-hour 
Masses, nor 11.00 to 12.15 services. Our chants are sung like 
arias, and take twice as long. It takes five minutes for the con- 
gregation to sing the Lord's Prayer. The Armenian church- 
goer is no clockwatcher. Every Sunday service is in fact a 
religious marathon, a colorful, devout, emotionally inspiring 
pageant that begins before nine and lasts uninterruptedly 
until about one p.m., often longer if the priest is young and 
has not fasted, or if a bishop visits the church. In the United 
States, services have been abridged to last three hours. 
To conform with the elaborate ceremonies, no tiny lapel- 
button palm could satisfy the Armenian. Nothing but man- 
sized palm leaves, from two to four feet long, are distributed 
on Palm Sunday. I picked one of these, and waved it on my 
way "home" to the Gloria. I determined I would hold on to 
it as long as possible as a symbol of peace and good will, lest 
I myself succumb to the bloodsoaked, hate-wracked environ- 
ment in which I found myself. It lay on the bureau in my 
hotel room until we got ready to leave Cairo. Then I put it in 
my suitcase. I carried the shriveled palm branch wherever I 
went, all through the Arab-Israel war, all over the Middle 
East—a frustrated missionary in quest of peace in the war- 
torn postwar world—a forlorn hope! I would look at it on the 
bureau, where I placed it in every hotel room in which I 
stayed, and say: "I wonder if your day will ever come." 
I have the palm leaf home now. 
Early one afternoon Moustafa rushed in. "Yallah!" 
I had been all but packed for days, restive with the long 
delay. It was getting unbearably hot and sticky, and the dust 
of the incredibly filthy Cairo str eets stuck to my face, got into Gun-Running! 201 
my eyelids, and made me itch frightfully every time I went 
outside the hotel. The beggars, bootblacks, dragomen, and 
countless other parasites were becoming more and more dan- 
gerous. Unless one was with an Arab or gave baksheesh, all the 
culprit had to do was yell Yahoodi and point his finger at the 
visitor, who would promptly be insulted, stoned, knifed, or 
mobbed. I was also living under the constant fear of exposure 
as John Roy Carlson, a name associated with attacks upon the 
kind of bigotry that in Cairo, was accepted as the acme of 
patriotism. It was with considerable relief that I strapped my 
suitcase. 
"Are we going by automobile?" That had been our plan. 
"No!" Faris answered, "we're taking the train." 
It was night when we arrived at El Qantara, on the Suez 
Canal, and waited for a train to ta ke us to the Palestine border. 
Scores of volunteer fighters were waiting at the customs, some 
with irregular papers, others with  none at all. Moustafa helped 
many of them. Among these were a couple of a sort all too 
common in Arab countries. They were dressed in khaki and 
carried knapsacks. What seemed to be the "he" of the two 
was a tall, gangling, nervous English-speaking youth wearing 
glasses, named Sammy, a Green Shirt member. Sammy's com- 
panion, in whose little finger he had entwined his own, was a 
soft-faced, blue-eyed, slim-waisted Arab from Alexandria, with 
a perpetual smile. His name was Ismail. When we boarded 
the train, the two sat close together in the compartment. 
Every time someone lit a match I saw them either holding 
hands, or Sammy with his arm around Ismail in the Arab ver- 
sion of necking. 
In this fashion and with this company we arrived at the 
Palestine border, beyond which no trains ran. By good for- 
tune, a truck carrying crates of contrabrand machinery was 
leaving for Gaza—the first major town on the other side of 
the Palestine border. Moustafa spoke to the driver. The driver 
nodded to us. We leaped in, Holy Warriors once more bound 
for high adventure and Allah's glory! (CHAPTER XI) 
RETURN TO JERUSALEM 
". . . the most stupid, th e most cowardly, the most 
inefficient soldiers I have ever seen. The Germans 
and I gave the Arabs many good ideas to destroy 
the Jewish villages. They are afraid of anything 
new. They say it will cost them too much money. 
They are waiting for Allah to help them!" 
Nazar Chalawitch 
Holy Warrior from Yugoslavia 
OUR truck, with a dozen assorted Arabs on board, raced to- 
ward Gaza. 
"Duck your head. You'll be shot." 
"I'm not afraid of the Jews, Moustafa." 
"Don't be crazy. They have already put a bullet in my foot!" 
I ducked, joining the terror-stricken Holy Warriors who 
cowered between the crates of merchandise like corraled 
sheep. I raised my head for a g ood look at the terror. A mile 
off the road were the ruins of a kibbutz, with only two build- 
ings left partially standing. Desert surrounded the wreckage. 
The settlement showed as much life as a neglected cemetery. 
Actually, this was heroic Kibbutz Kfar Darom, one of the 
southernmost of the Jewish settlements. A shipwreck in the 
desert sea, it served as an invaluable observation post for 
troops and supply movements, and sprang to life only when 
attacked. Return to Jerusalem 203 
"The Egyptian army will soon massacre those Jews," Mou- 
stafa threatened.1 
Past the last roadblock and inspection post, we climbed a 
dusty road that suddenly reared itself over the flatness. We 
roared down the main street in a terrific cloud of dust, ripping 
through a maze of donkeys, carts, pastry vendors, bearded 
Bedouins, and armed Arabs. At  the marketplace we stopped 
with screaming brakes. Alighting, we went to a coffee house 
perched above the teeming street  and shaded from the blister- 
ing sun by dried branches. It was a restful nook. Here one 
could get all the news, establish contacts, and transact his 
business while drinking hot tea, and smoking the narghileh, 
without moving once beyond range of a backgammon board. 
"The drinks are on me," I said. 
We ordered tall glasses of dark  hot tea, heavy with sugar 
and flavored with fresh mint . Faris and Moustafa looked 
around to see whom they knew. Additional chairs and more 
tables were brought over. Samm y and his beloved Ismail con- 
tinued their mutual adoration, oblivious to everyone else. 
I was absorbed by historic Gaza, now a city of dust and 
donkeys. Without these faithful little animals traffic would 
have been paralyzed. All day long they trudged at an unvary- 
ing pace, head always drooping—docile, four-legged fellaheen, 
carrying everything from gasoline tins to pot-bellied, satin- 
skirted Arabs three times their weight. Centuries ago thou- 
sands of Greeks living here had been forcibly converted to 
Islam, so that a large proportion of its population was origi- 
nally Christian. A few Armeni an families remained from the 
large numbers once here. Gaza was an all-Arab community 
now, Moslem in spirit and appearance. Streets were devoid of 
1 It never did. Before the Mandate Kfar Darom was attacked repeatedly 
by volunteer bands. Later it was pulverized  by Egyptian regulars, who at one 
time broke into the settlement perimeter and were driven out only after a 
bitter building-to-building battle. On the night of July 8, 1948, Kfar Darom 
was booby-trapped and evacuated quietly . A handful of defenders slipped 
through the Egyptian lines at night, ta king along their wounded, and reached 
Tel Aviv safely . 204 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
women; the few who walked were  old, veiled, heavily garbed 
in gloomy black clothing. Male couples promenaded con- 
stantly. I photographed them: the result showed one couple 
with their fingers entwined; another husky couple were walk- 
ing arm in arm. 
From where I was sitting I could make out three distinct 
markets in this ancient city. To my right were the pushcarts, 
sidewalk bazaars, and shops w ith baskets and sacks sprawled 
on the street. Directly in front was a large square—the gaso- 
line and taxi mart. On my left, at the foot of a high wall 
shaded by overhanging willows, was a munitions market. Re- 
volvers, grenades, brass knuckles, daggers, and stacks of ammu- 
nition were arrayed on mats on the sidewalk. Arabs bargained 
excitedly and swore their poverty, but pulled out fat rolls of 
Palestinian currency when the d eal was closed. Ragged children 
darted in and out of the stalls. A truckload of refugees arrived, 
piled out, and dispersed, carrying their pitiful bundles on their 
backs and on hired donkeys. 
Only one sight gladdened me. Gaza had a sweet tooth. 
Huge round trays of Oriental desserts were paraded on push- 
carts, the peddler weighing the precious pastry on his scales— 
sometimes adding the weight of his fingers—while urchins 
sneaked up from behind, scooped the pan with cupped hand 
and skipped away. 
"I'm getting hungry, Moustafa." 
"Yallah. We are all hungry." 
THE UNWELCOME VISITOR 
WE FOUND a nameless little re staurant opposite the Grand 
Gaza Hotel which had a frontage of only ten feet but was 
sixty feet deep with a ceiling at least twenty feet high. We took 
a table in the rear where it was as cool as a wine cellar. A little 
gray donkey with fuzzy ears and short tail, on its back a gunny Return to Jerusalem 205 
sack loaded with gasoline tins, followed us into the restau- 
rant and decided to stand vigil at our table. The proprietor 
was not amused. He came roaring out of the kitchen with a 
soup ladle. A waiter rushed up w ith pot covers and began to 
beat them like cymbals in the animal's ear, while the ladle 
hammered a drumbeat on its piously bent head. A second 
waiter began cursing and tugging at the motionless beast, but 
couldn't budge it. It just blinked its eyes and withstood the 
combined assault with astonishing aplomb. 
"He must be very hungry," Moustafa observed. 
"He'd make a good soldier," I said. "Look how calm he is 
under fire." 
Just then the donkey's owner rushed in. He was an elderly 
Bedouin with a straggly beard and was shaking his whip ex- 
citedly. I suppose he shouted th e equivalent of "How dare 
you steal my donkey, you cur!" because the words were no 
sooner out of his mouth than the proprietor rushed on him 
with the ladle, followed by th e first waiter who brandished 
the pot covers like shields before him and pounced on the old 
Arab. With a magnificent sense of timing the donkey halted 
the proceedings by unceremoniously arching its tail and drop- 
ping its manure on the spot. While the proprietor and his 
waiters looked on speechlessly, the donkey deftly turned 
around and made a quick exit, followed by its master, who 
leaped on its back as soon as th ey reached the sidewalk. Off 
they trotted in a dust cloud. 
"Ma'alesh. Let's eat." 
The waiter with the pot covers returned with pan and 
broom, and cleaned up, cursing loudly. I went into the 
kitchen and ordered by pointing to pots and pans on the stove 
containing what I thought I would like. I ordered a plate of 
rice with lamb and tomato sauce; another of chickpeas with 
lamb, seasoned with paprika. I topped this with yoghourt and 
drafts of water. 
The sight of two soldiers in khaki passing by outside made 
me jump. 206 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Moustafa, there go the Followers of Truth!" 
He pounced after the pair. I followed. Faris and the lovers, 
who knew nothing of our vendetta against Sheikh Azaayim's 
men, stayed behind. We were almost upon the two before 
they wheeled around. I was ready for anything, but nothing 
happened. We learned that the Followers had finally crossed 
the Suez, and were now living at the government barracks at 
Gaza. They had already participated in an attack against 
Kibbutz Kfar Darom. 
"Did they lose any men?" I asked. 
"Yes," Moustafa answered. "T hey lost twenty-three, and 
thirty-seven were wounded. They are glad Sheikh Azaayim 
did not lead them because he, too, might have been dead 
now." 
"But weren't they all supposed to be immune to Jewish 
bullets?" 
At this moment a tall, well-built Sudanese in a rumpled 
uniform and gun slung across his back approached the two 
Followers. They greeted him affectionately as a brother Mos- 
lem who had fought with them at Kfar Darom and escaped 
unhurt. 
"He did not die because of the paper he carries," Moustafa 
interpreted. 
"What paper?" 
The Sudanese opened his shirt and produced a wrinkled 
parchment suspended by a string around his neck. It was 
about twelve by eighteen inches, covered with Arabic script 
in red ink. Moustafa read some of it. 
"The imam [priest] in his village wrote it," he explained. 
"It says that the owner of this holy scroll is a true Moslem 
who is engaged in fighting the Jehad. He is therefore immune 
to all manner of lead and steel." 
"Does he believe that?" I asked. 
"Yes. Lead and steel will not touch his skin. He believes 
Allah will lead him away from danger and he will come back 
alive to his home and family." Return to Jerusalem 207 
A group of young toughs armed to the teeth approached 
us. Moustafa let out a whoop of joy. As they came nearer I 
saw that one wore the uniform of the Arab Legion, three were 
Followers of Truth, two had the Green Shirt insignia. They 
were led by a sheikh in a white turban, who was wrapped 
heavily in a flowing gray robe that came to his ankles; wound 
around his neck, as if it were arctic weather, was a heavy 
woolen scarf. From his left shoulder hung a sub-machine-gun. 
I knew I had seen him before. Only when he stretched out his 
hand in greeting did I recognize him as the St. Patrick's Day 
spellbinder I had heard in Cairo, who had swayed like a cobra 
while he mesmerized the Green Shirts. He had grown a full 
beard, which, with his deep-set  eyes and vitriolic face, made 
him look even more Mcphistophclian in daylight than at 
night. 
It was like old home week in Gaza as other comrades joined 
the crowd. Some twenty of us trouped toward the town square, 
the midan. Once there, the boys decided to spend the after- 
noon at the beach. I told Moustafa I'd join them later. Our 
life was so unpredictable from hour to hour that I wanted to 
see Samson's Tomb before leaving for Jerusalem. 
I found it a few dusty blocks away from the main street. 
Here, on a hillock, was an igloo-shaped structure about ten 
feet high, with scrub weeds growing over it. It was surrounded 
by filth and dried human offal.  I ducked my head into an. 
opening in the side of the tomb, but recoiled at the unbear- 
able stench. It was hard to be lieve that according to tradition 
a majestic temple of the Philistines once stood on this stink- 
ing stone heap, and that the blinded Samson in a last mighty 
effort of bitterness and humiliation pulled it crashing down 
upon his head, "so the dead which he slew at his death were 
more than they which he slew in his life." 208 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
BEACH PARTY, ARAB FASHION 
I INQUIRED my way to the beach to find Moustafa and the 
others. The Mediterranean shor e here was dotted with rotting 
hulks and small fishing vessels, and everywhere were huddled 
male groups. It was one of the strangest beach parties I ever 
saw. It was strictly stag, with not a single woman in sight, 
and every man in flowing gallabiya, bournous, or combination 
native and European garb. They were playing backgammon, 
drinking hot tea, coffee, arak (a Middle Eastern form of 
brandy), and smoking the nargileh. To the left was a white- 
washed shanty—the coffee house. Most of the Arabs reclined 
in the shade provided by blankets hung from poles driven in 
the sand; some sat on short, squat bulrush chairs. 
Guarding the beach were Arab Legion soldiers, wearing 
the red and white dotted khaffi ya instead of the customary 
white. An English army truck was pulled up on the sand: in it 
were more Legion soldiers—at a time when the presence of 
the Legion in Palestine was hotly denied by official British 
spokesmen, as I was to learn later. 
I located our party, including Faris and Sammy and Ismail, 
but Moustafa was nowhere ar ound. Faris was chatting with 
four companions, and as I watched them I realized that they 
were homosexuals. The most warlike among them—judging 
by his dress and armaments—was a rotund, pasty-faced, slov- 
enly man in his late twenties who spoke excellent English. 
"Where did you learn English?" I asked. 
"From the English soldiers. They have a big camp at Rafa." 
"How do you like the English?" 
"Very much, indeed. Some of them are exceptionally 
friendly and nice. I wish they weren't planning to leave." 
He was the first Arab I had met who had a kind word for 
the British. 
Sammy and his lover couldn't seem to have enough of each Return to Jerusalem 209 
other. They were promenading arm in arm on the beach, or 
with arms around each other's waists, giggling and carrying 
on like teen-age sweethearts. In this they were by no means 
alone. The beach was filled with amorous though less demon- 
strative men, both young and old, the young often with the 
old, sitting close together, or back to back, or stretched out 
full length on the sand. 
"Take my picture," the E nglish-speaking Arab asked. 
"Make me look like a soldier." He whipped out his pistol and, 
aiming it toward Tel Aviv, assumed a fierce look. 
"Hold that pose," I said. "You look like Allah's messenger." 
This gave me an opening fo r photographing everyone on 
the beach—mementos of an all-male beach party. After I had 
taken a dozen photographs, one of the group introduced him- 
self to me as a member of the Gaza City Council. We chatted 
for a few moments and I asked: 
"How does the war look?" 
"See that water?" He pointed with his narghileh. "One 
month from now it will be black as far as the horizon with the 
nude bodies of floating Jews." 
"Insh'allah, Wallah." 
Just then Moustafa emerged from a clump of bushes to 
the left—from a dark-shaded nook into which I had noticed 
Sammy and Ismail disappear. The two did not reappear until 
almost an hour later, arm in ar m. The mystery deepened when 
two more members of the party vanished in the same direc- 
tion—and didn't return. As the afternoon wore on, one by 
one the trucks and cars, the lovers old and young, left the 
beach. "Let's go look for them," Moustafa said. We all rose. 
I deliberately fell in with the effeminate Arab whose photo- 
graph I'd taken. 
"Our Bible says that Samson used to come to Gaza for his 
pleasure. Arc the two friends for whom we are looking at a 
place where one may find public women for one's pleasure?" 
I inquired teasingly. 
The Arab wheeled around, shocked, momentarily speechless. 210 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"We are very strict in Gaza," he gasped. "If we found any 
such places we would burn them. If we found any such 
women we would hang them." Quite upset, he left my com- 
pany and did not talk to me again. 
We walked to the clump of bushes, which thickened as we 
went through them, and emerged into a narrow, dusty street. 
Ahead was an angular, three-storied, gray stone house, set off 
by itself, which appeared to be a hotel. Moustafa was on the 
verge of entering when the two men we were seeking stepped 
out. One of them was Abdul, a Green Shirt member. His 
companion, also a youth in his early twenties, was from Gaza. 
"We were praying," Abdul explained, smiling. 
When we had walked back to Gaza's main street, we split 
company. The others had been invited to a dinner party by 
the Gaza Council member. It was getting dark fast. I turned 
to Moustafa. 
"What'll we do now?" 
"We have been invited to another place," Moustafa said 
mysteriously. "We will go there later. First, let's find a place 
to sleep." 
The obvious place for us was the Grand Gaza Hotel, op- 
posite the restaurant where we had eaten. The Grand Gaza 
Hotel was strictly a misnomer. By American standards it was 
fourth rate, but it was the best the city of Samson could offer. 
Moustafa and I got a room on the top floor with two cots, 
two chairs and a candle. There was no other furniture, not 
even a washpan. To wash, one used the community tap and 
community soap and towel on the floor below. The place was 
reasonably clean and gave no evidence of harboring crawling 
visitors. We washed, Moustafa again borrowed my comb, 
and we stepped out. 
"Where are we going, Moustafa?" 
"You will be very much surprised. Trust me." 
The streets were now pitch dark. There was no moon. 
Electric power had been cut off long ago. Moustafa was not 
familiar with the section and every few minutes he paused to Return to Jerusalem 211 
ask directions. Walking through a tortuous maze of blacked- 
out alleys, stumbling over deep ruts and protruding rocks, I 
felt we would never reach our destination, whatever Allah 
had decreed it to be. 
"Moustafa, you aren't taking me to Abdul's prayer house?" 
"You are too impatient, Artour. Wait." 
Finally we came to a high wall, followed it for a block, and 
then turned to find ourselves before a high wide gate topped 
with iron spikes. We banged on it. We heard the shuffling of 
feet, and a voice, echoing sharply in the deathly stillness, 
challenged us in Arabic. Mousta fa answered; one of the doors 
was swung open by an Arab, and we found ourselves in a 
large courtyard. At the farther end was a house with lights 
shining from the first- and second-story windows. 
"Is it all right to speak English?" 
"Yes. You can also talk German if you wish." 
That put me on guard. The Arab gateman now opened an 
inner door and motioned us into a large room lighted by two 
kerosene lamps, which cast a flickering light on a group of 
men standing near a large table covered with food. 
DINNER WITH NAZI HERRENVOLK 
MY GAZE swept past a well-dressed Arab in flowing robes, 
who was apparently the host, and fell upon seven men, six of 
them in uniform. The seventh was a brown-haired non-Ger- 
man, apparently a Slav. His right sleeve hung empty from the 
shoulder of his dark-green Amer ican officer's coat. All seven 
stared at us stiffly. 
"Guten Abend, Kameraden! Good evening, comrades. 
Heil!" I said, giving the short-arm Nazi salute as I had done 
innumerable times at Bund meetings. 
A jet of steam appeared to have struck them: the faces 
melted instantly and burst into smiles. The six snapped their 212 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
heels, heiled back in unison, and all began talking at once in 
German. 
"Ach, meine Freunde, meine Kunde der deutschen Sprache 
ist unglucklicherweise nicht so gross wie meine Liebe fur das 
deutsche Volk. Ah, my friends. Unfortunately my knowl- 
edge of German is not so strong as my love for the German 
people." Over and again I had used that at Bund meet- 
ings. 
One of the Nazis translated my  effusion into Arabic, much 
to the delight of our host. Seeing me so well received, 
Moustafa added his praise of the manly, bold, loyal Arme- 
nian who had been living with the Arabs. As usual, my Amer- 
ican citizenship was an incidental detail. Our host, beside 
himself, kept repeating: "Ahlan wa sahlen, mit ahlan wa 
sahlen! Sharraftuna! Hallet el-baraka! Welcome and welcome 
again! What an honor! What a pleasure! What a blessing 
from Allah!" 
The only one to speak English among the Germans was 
introduced to me as Gerhard. He had a long face, dark hair, 
and sideburns, and had perfected his English at a British 
prisoner-of-war camp. As we sat down to a lavish dinner, I 
asked him: 
"How did you escape?" 
"Through the Mufti's help. Twenty of us crossed the Canal 
in a boat one night. Cars were waiting for us on the other 
side." 
"Only twenty have escaped?" 
"Oh, no. More, hundreds more—some by hiding under 
merchandise in trucks. Others are disguising themselves as 
Arabs and carrying false papers , and others get through by 
bribing. Customs officials at Is mailia are friendly. Der Gross- 
mufti makes all the arrangements. In a few days we expect 
twenty-five more comrades here. They will come with guns." 
"English guns?" 
"Naturlich. Stolen from camp or  sold by English soldiers. 
The Arabs get much equipment that way." Return to Jerusalem 213 
"Who is our host?" 
"He is a relative of the Mufti. Many of the Mufti's cousins 
and nephews are in Gaza and rule the city. In a few weeks 
Gaza will become the capital of the Mufti's Palestine govern- 
ment. The Egyptian army will also make its headquarters 
here." 
"How many Germans in the Suez camps?" I asked. 
"Many thousands. Perhaps 12,500 or more of the Afrika 
Korps. There are also many high  officers, even some generals. 
Sitting at this table are a captain and two lieutenants. I was a 
lieutenant with Rommel," Gerhard said. After a moment he 
shook his head. "These Arabs make big talk but do not fight 
like an army. They are not trained. They do not know disci- 
pline. We fought with them against the Jewish villages. We 
know. That man," he said, pointing to the amputee, "is a 
Yugoslav Moslem. He lost his ar m in Haifa. There's another 
Yugoslav recuperating at the Civilian Hospital here in Gaza. 
If you want to know about the Arabs as fighters, go see him. 
He has been with them longer than I have." 
Our host was generous, and cons tantly pushed platters of 
food before us. "Tafaddal. Please." The Nazis eat heartily. 
They seemed happy and confid ent, and only one of them— 
Friedrich, a short but powerfully built young man in leggings 
—appeared surly. He said little, but appeared to be watching 
me carefully. 
Finally our host had the coffee brought in. 
"Sallim idek, may God preserve your hands," I said. Later, 
when I had finished the tar-black  brew and put down the cup, 
I added: "Kahwe daime. Ma y you always have coffee." 
My host beamed at my choice vocabulary. 
It was eleven o'clock as Mousta fa and I rose to leave. There 
was much salaaming and hand shaking back and forth. The 
Nazis—except Friedrich, who gave us a cold, correct quick 
handshake—pumped our  hands. Our host said, "Sharrifna 
tani, marra, insh'allah. Come again when Allah wills it. 
"Mae es-salame. Mae es-salame. God speed. God speed." 214 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Mamnunah Our thanks to you," we said, and walked into 
the night. 
THE MADMAN 
MOUSTAFA and I walked in silence through the blacked- 
out streets. Gaza was as dead as Samson's Tomb, with not a 
living thing visible or audible. Only an occasional light flick- 
ered from a second-story window: those on the first floor were 
either heavily latticed or c overed with wooden shutters 
locked tight. Then, in the silen ce, I became aware of a muffled 
shuffling of feet behind us. I turned around several times 
uneasily, but saw nothing. 
"Somebody is following us, Moustafa. Stop now, and 
listen. . . ." 
The shuffling continued for a few seconds, then stopped. 
It began again when we resumed walking. 
"You are right," Moustafa said, softly, reaching for his 
holster. "What have you to protect yourself?" 
"You know I have nothing but a Boy Scout knife." 
We walked faster. "How many are there?" I asked. 
"I think only one, unless they are keeping in perfect step." 
I recalled that Bedouin tribes sometimes welcomed a 
stranger, or even an enemy, to their home, honored him at 
their table, then followed him and stabbed him later. I won- 
dered if our host would attempt such a thing. Or could it be 
some of the Nazis—Friedrich, for instance? It could be a 
Follower of Truth. And there was the Gaza man whom I'd in- 
sulted at the beach. His kind were known to hire assassins. 
. . . It was still a long way to the Grand Gaza Hotel. 
Without breaking step Moustafa leaned over and whis- 
pered: "When I take your hand in mine, run. Then we will 
hide." 
We broke into a double run, hand in hand, and heard our 
pursuer follow. Return to Jerusalem 215 
"If there are more than one we do nothing," Moustafa 
said, breathing hard. "If we see only one, I will go for his 
throat, you strike at his heart. But make no noise. Be sure 
nothing drops from your pockets. . . . Now hide in that 
doorway. I will be on this side. . . ." 
We slunk into the shadows, opposite each other, so that 
the pursuer would have to pass between us. I pulled back as 
far as I could. Although Moustafa was hardly fifteen feet 
away he was invisible. I waited, breathing heavily but noise- 
lessly through my mouth. 
A figure emerged dimly from the blackness of night and 
approached slowly. He veered to the right—the side where I 
was crouching. He hugged the wa lls, apparently suspecting a 
trap. I bent low, my knife blade open, ready to pounce on 
him if he attacked first. The shadowy figure slipped by within 
three feet of me. I saw him peering to the left and ahead of 
him. He was a short man, wearing what seemed to be a 
European coat and narrow trousers. He passed, and I waited 
for a few minutes that seemed endless. 
"Moustafa," I whispered hoarsely. "He's gone." 
"Sssshhh. Maybe he also is hiding. Wait." 
I straightened out, glued myself against the doorway and 
now saw the outlines of Moustafa's husky frame. After sev- 
eral more minutes he moved out of the doorway. "Stick 
close." I followed him. There was no sound now except our 
soft tread. Either the pursuer had continued up the street, 
or was lurking somewhere in the inky stillness. We moved 
ahead gingerly, and the susp ense became even more unbear- 
able than before. But we had lost  all track of the stranger. The 
riddle of his identity deepened . Who? Why? Had we been 
wise in hiding? 
It was midnight when we broke into the town square, as 
dark and deserted as the rest of Gaza. We walked cautiously 
past the boarded shops of main street, and slipped into our 
hotel. No one seemed to be in the narrow vestibule. The ho- 
tel itself was on the second floor, the entrance barred by an 216 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
iron grated door midway on the stairs. We knocked. The 
night clerk called out sleepily from an inner room. He would 
not let us in, he said, until he had looked us up in the register. 
It would take a few minutes—Arab minutes! We sat down 
on the stairs in the dark while the clerk, cursing the world at 
large, looked for the register. At long last he demanded the 
details of Moustafa's registration. I had to call out my pass- 
port number and spell out my name. Finally the clerk, in 
slippers and red striped pajam as, stumbled down his half of 
the stairs and let us go up. 
"I must be careful," he explained. "There was a stranger 
here a short time ago." 
"Who was he?" Moustafa asked quickly. 
"I do not know. He was not an Arab." 
The iron gate had hardly been closed when someone 
crashed open the door below. Then there was a knocking and 
shaking of the iron grill. The terrified night clerk begged us 
to take charge. Moustafa's que ries brought a reply in hesitant 
but adequate Arabic, spoken in a heavy guttural accent 
"It's one of the Germans," Moustafa said. 
"Invite him to our room." 
"First we will take away his gun if he has any." 
He certainly had one. At the point of Moustafa's drawn 
pistol, the Nazi placed his revolver on the night clerk's desk. 
We followed the German to our room and made him sit on 
the chair while Moustafa and I faced him from our beds. It 
was Friedrich: a beet-red, prematurely bald, ugly man with 
colorless eyes buried in a hatchet face. He came to the point 
with surprising frankness. 
"I followed you to shoot you," he said in good English. 
I felt a pricking of my scalp. 
"One, or the both of us?" I asked. 
"You," he snarled. "You are a Jew!" 
Moustafa and I laughed nervous ly. "Artour is an Arme- 
nian," Moustafa said. 
"That is the same as a Jew. The English, the Jews, the Return to Jerusalem 217 
Armenians, and the Americans must be exterminated!" 
There was no doubt that Friedrich meant it, for his eyes took 
on an almost maniacal look. 
It required a long time and a full display of my assorted 
documents, including the one obtained from my church at- 
testing to my Christian faith, to  prove to hirh that Jews were 
Jews and Armenians were Armenians. "We are such old-time 
Aryans," I said, "that Bundesfuhrer Fritz Kuhn once said 
that Christ was an Armenian, not a Jew." It happened to be 
true—the fact that Kuhn told the lie. 
When the German left it was past two o'clock. We snuffed 
out the candle. It was a long time before I fell asleep. 
"THE MOST STUPID SOLDIERS" 
"WHAT are we going to do this morning, Moustafa?" 
"As soon as Faris comes we will go to El Arish for the 
guns." 
I wanted to talk to the Yugoslav at the hospital. "Moustafa, 
let's first go to the hospital," I suggested. "There are Arme- 
nian nurses there. I will introduce you to them. Take your 
pick." 
I counted on Moustafa to get me inside the hospital. I 
wasn't sure I could manage it myself. Tilings worked out as 
planned. While Moustafa indulged in a blind-alley flirtation 
with two Armenian nurses, I strolled through the wards. One 
of the patients introduced himself to me as Nazar Chalawitch, 
a former captain in Yugoslav quisling Pavelich's army, now 
an Arab fighter who was convalescing. I told him I was 
Gerhard's friend. 
"How did you get hurt?" I asked. 
"Fighting with the most stupid, the most cowardly, the 
most inefficient soldiers I have ever seen," Nazar exploded. 
"The Germans and I gave the Arabs many good ideas to de- 218 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
stroy the Jewish villages. They are afraid of anything new. 
They say it will cost them too much money. They are waiting 
for Allah to help them!" 
Deeply embittered, he went on: "If those Arabs had fol- 
lowed orders we'd have cleaned out the Jews long ago. Take 
this village outside Gaza [Ki bbutz Kfar Darom]. We made a 
perfect plan to attack it with three columns: 34 Germans 
and eight Yugoslavs in one co lumn, 210 Ikhwan in another; 
a hundred Followers of Truth making the third column. We 
were to assemble exactly at midnight and march from three 
sides. The Germans were on time. Ikhwan came three hours 
late. The others—just before sunrise! We couldn't surprise 
the Jews. We attacked anyway—lost about forty men. A bul- 
let went through my hip." 
When I returned to Moustafa, he had already given up his 
strenuous attempts to date one  of the nurses. Outside the 
hospital he turned to me and blew up. "Must you be a saint 
to go out with an Armenian?" he demanded, disgusted. 
"Yallah.'" 
Faris was waiting for us at the hotel with a truck, and off 
we went to the Egyptian military base at El Arish, where we 
were directed to a thick-walled, heavily guarded building. 
Only one person at a time was allowed entry, and Faris went 
in with what he said were rece ipts for the guns we expected. 
He emerged to say that no one knew anything about them. 
"Go in yourself, Moustafa, and ask." 
Moustafa returned empty-handed, a dejected figure. The 
guns had simply disappeared. "If we don't find those guns and 
sell them, I have lost everything. I borrowed the money," he 
said pathetically. 
"Don't worry, Moustafa. Allah will find them." 
Faris—whose investment was much larger than Moustafa's 
—seemed unconcerned. He chatted amiably all the way back 
to Gaza. 
Two mornings later Faris a nnounced we could ride part 
way to Jerusalem, at least. He had located a sheik's son who Return to Jerusalem 219 
had driven in to buy gasoline and was prepared to give us a 
lift to Jerusalem. We gladly accepted his offer. Of the Green 
Shirts, we could locate only Sammy and Ismail. We left the 
others behind and set off. 
WE ARRIVE AT THE TOMB CITY 
HALF WAY to Jerusalem the road was marked by ancient 
olive groves, the trees gnarled like an octogenarian's hand. 
Between the trees a farmer ploughed with a camel—the skirts 
of his gallabiya pulled above the knees and tucked into a 
sash around his waist, revealing his loose underwear. The 
plough was of wood, as in the days when Abraham first 
trudged over these fields. Down the road came barefooted 
women with enormous bundles of brushwood balanced on 
their heads, overshadowing their faces. Walking with her 
mother, a little girl balanced a large kettle, black with soot, on 
her head. In the shade a group of men lounged, gossiping and 
smoking, their donkeys dozing behind them. In the fields, 
the women worked. This was the Arab world. 
We reached a hilltop: below us spread a deep-green valley. 
A sparkling stream wound its way around a tiny hamlet 
in the foothills. In the distan ce rose the spires of Jerusalem. 
To our right were the four kibbutzim composing the Kfar 
Etzion block. As we stopped to rest, a truck laden with volun- 
teers drove up, and we heard the latest news. It was bad. The 
Arabs were being pushed back gradually from their New City 
positions. The rich Arabs and most of the Arab leaders had 
already fled Jerusalem. "The deserting cowards!" Moustafa 
exploded. The Arabs lacked heav y guns and there was disunity 
in the leadership since Abdu l Kader el Husseini's death. 
We moved into Jerusalem. I ha d come here for the first 
time only three weeks before. The city had changed radically. 
Its heart had been plucked out, its life-throb silenced. It was 220 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
late afternoon when we arrived, but there were few pedes- 
trians, mostly old people. Roadblocks, sandbags, dragon's 
teeth were everywhere, and barbed wire coated with rust. 
Most of the homes were deserted, the shops boarded up. 
Tommies in khaki, wearing berets with red pompoms, 
prowled in armored cars. They searched and questioned every- 
one crossing from one zone to another; after that, Jewish and 
Arab vigilantes took over. Overturned trucks lay rusting, 
stripped of tires and movable gear. Dynamited buildings were 
everywhere. The dark red pool in the middle of the street 
might be the spot where a horse had bled to death, or a man 
was shot. The ripped-up sidewalk marked the explosion of 
a mortar. 
Cities, I thought, are like human beings. Dressed in brick, 
mortar, stone and steel, they beat with a pulse that is the col- 
lective soul of their people. They live, breathe, and die like 
humans. There are ghost cities; cities of sin or sorrow, hard 
and harsh and masculine like New York; reckless and free 
cities; tradition-bound cities; hectic  cities; sleepy cities; or gay 
and feminine cities, like Paris. When they are living, cities have 
souls of their own. But when the creeping paralysis of terror 
comes, they die inside like human beings. 
The little things that make th e world come alive—a woman 
with a shopping basket, gossipping; a man waiting for a bus, 
smoking; an exasperated mother spanking her bawling child; 
a busy grocery, a coffee shop, a traffic policeman—all these 
were now gone from Jerusalem. Fear and death were in the 
air you breathed, in every step you took. There was the terror 
of the unseen trigger-hand—English, Arab, Jew, depending 
on which side you stood—in the whine of every bullet, the 
crash of every shell. The poisons of hatred, long simmering, 
were now erupting and spilling over on every side of the once 
Holy City. A sense of impending calamity hung in the air; a 
dread vacuum was the new spirit, and desolation the "new 
look" of the tomb city. (CHAPTER XII) 
WITH THE ARABS IN JERUSALEM 
From the lampposts hang all the RABBIS  
But hang HERTZOG highest of all 
And when you have hung all the Jew-boys 
Then blow up their damned WAILING WALL . 
AMO [Arab Military Organization] 
I STOOD under a tree on the Hill of Evil Counsel on an in- 
comparably beautiful and clear May morning, each Jerusalem 
landmark radiantly etched against a cloudless sky. Sheep 
grazed in the olive grove below me—guarded by an Arab in 
battle dress, rifle on lap, gren ades dangling from his belt. In 
the heavens, God was in His gl ory. On earth hate reigned 
supreme. The whine of snipers' bullets was constant, like the 
drone of a giant mosquito. It was the season for mating, but 
shells and the rattle of machine- guns had driven off the birds. 
Jerusalem was beginning to fall apart as a city, disintegrat- 
ing. Mail delivery had stopped. The railroad yard was deserted. 
The magistrates had fled: the courts and police stations were 
closed. Law and order was in the hands of local committees. 
You were condemned, imprisoned, or shot by vigilante gangs. 
Thieving was normal and went unpunished. It began with a 
deserted home, and continued w ith the theft of British army 
and government property: office furniture, files, furnaces, 
doors, windowpanes. Vehicles—tr ucks, jeeps, armored cars, 
even post-office vans—were stolen unless under guard. 222 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
The Palestine Post ran a daily column listing casualties. By 
May 1, 1948, 5,014 had died (189 English, 1,236 Jews, 3,569 
Arabs) and 6,632 had been wounded. 
I strolled over to the Public Information Office and wan- 
dered into the small canteen operated there for the cor- 
respondents. Jewish and Arab newspapermen still mixed: 
coolly, suspiciously. The Jewish boys came mainly to get a 
good meal. Ahmed, the Arab counterman, served eggs, milk, 
beer, potatoes, and coffee, and had cigarettes for sale—all rare 
in the New City. When Jews tried to buy food to take home, 
Ahmed would say: "If I sold it to you the Arabs would cut 
my body into small pieces." I met an Arab here, named Nassib 
Boulos, working for the British as a propagandist, and at the 
same time serving as a string correspondent for Life magazine. 
Boulos always hovered around the American newsmen, trying 
to get a line on each one. He came over to my table. 
"I hear you're a Zionist." 
"I don't know what Zionism is. I haven't seen enough of 
the Jews." 
I had a premonition that Boulos would cross my path later 
on, and make trouble. In the days that followed, a series of 
nasty anti-Jewish booklets and leaflets began to circulate 
among correspondents, anonymously signed "AMO"—the 
Arab Military Organization, an adjunct of the Mufti's Arab 
Higher Committee. Addressed to "British Soldiers! British 
Policemen! British Civilians!" they sought to incite non-Arabs 
against the Jews. One of the leaflets was in doggerel: 
Put a bomb in the [Jewish] Agency Buildings 
Wipe the Synagogues all off the earth, 
And make every damned son of ZION  
Regret the day of his birth. 
From the lampposts hang all the RABBIS  
But hang HERTZOG1 highest of all 
And when you have hung all the Jew-boys 
1 Dr. Isaac Halevy Herzog, then Chief Rabbi of Palestine, later Rabbi of 
Israel. With the Arabs in Jerusalem 223 
Then blow up their damned WAILING WALL . . . . 
You will find you are down as the Heroes 
Of the last and the greatest Crusade, 
And then you will all go to HEAVEN  
And  I WILL BE THERE AS WELL. 
And we all charge our glasses, 
AND DRINK TO JEWS THERE IN HELL. 
LIFE IN OSBORNE HOUSE 
AGAINST the panorama of growing death and destruction, 
life was exciting in Osborne House, our Arab headquarters on 
Deir Aboutor. It had become suicidal to cross no-man's land; 
I made no attempt now, as I had when here earlier, to sleep 
at the "Y." The road was under constant and intense Arab 
surveillance. So I lived with the boys in Osborne House, sleep- 
ing with them on mats; shaving, washing, and bathing daily 
in a pint of water or less. Our diet consisted of olives, scallions, 
halvah, and stale bread donated by Old City bakeries. Occa- 
sionally we would have bean stew, or goulash of some kind, 
cooked by Sabri, who during our absence had become quarter- 
master. Captain Zaki had feathered his nest nicely: he was 
second in charge of Deir A boutor defenses and Moustafa 
found himself out of place. Sammy and Ismail made them- 
selves at home sleeping together on adjoining mats in a store- 
room. Faris strutted about like a general. 
The collection of Green Shirts and other volunteers had be- 
come more bizarre. Syrian soldiers—swarthy, sullen fellows, 
bristling with weapons—had requi sitioned an adjoining house. 
They loved to have their pictures taken and I obliged them by 
running a souvenir picture service. They taught me much 
about Arab life and habits. Ev ery afternoon I watched them 
strip down to the waist and engage in a traditional Arab past- 
time: lice-hunting. They picked their clothes clean, but never 224 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
cleaned their rifles. A rifle is supposed to be cleaned and oiled 
periodically, if not after every battle. But in all the months I 
was with the Arabs I never saw one cleaned or oiled. Nor did 
I see any being repaired. If a rifle didn't work, it was usually 
laid aside. 
The Arabs were equally careless with hand-grenades. My 
most anxious moments were spent when the volunteers began 
toying with English- and Fren ch-made grenades, tossing them 
from hand to hand, or taking them apart "to see what was 
inside." I heard of many fatal accidents and met several hor- 
ribly mutilated Arabs. Whenever I was about, a half dozen 
would encircle me, unhook their grenades, jiggle the pull-ring, 
and do other weird stunts threatening to blow us all up. I'd 
dash behind the sandbags while they, the brave Arabs, played 
with dynamite and laughed at  the terrified Amrikani. 
I observed that the fat-bellied Zaki paid increasing attention 
to Ismail. At first Ismail slept at Osborne House, with the rest 
of the volunteers. Then one day he removed his belongings 
and went to a nearby house which Captain Zaki had appropri- 
ated for himself and other members of the defense staff. Every 
morning after this Sabri would soft-boil four eggs, wrap them 
in a towel, and take them over, together with oranges, bananas, 
cheese, honey or jam, halvah, o lives, white bread, and coffee. 
We all envied this diet and grumbled to Sabri about it. 
"These are my orders. I must do as the captain commands." 
To cut into these regal breakfasts, I determined to get into 
Ismail's good graces. This was not difficult. I suggested taking 
his photograph. I decorated him with guns and cartridge 
belts, told him he was handsome, and photographed him to 
his heart's delight. When he offered to pay, I suggested settling 
for a breakfast. Next morning Sa bri asked me to come along 
when he took breakfast over. Taking six soft-boiled eggs and 
quantities of other food, he led me to a room which was bare 
except for two beds, a chest of drawers, and a table. Zaki and 
Ismail were in their pajamas. I pulled up a chair and joined 
them at breakfast. Later, by photographing Zaki gratis and With the Arabs in Jerusalem 225 
taking more pictures of Ismail I made sure of a fine breakfast 
every morning until the Mandate ended and real war broke 
out. 
In charge of our arsenal in Osborne House—a small 
boarded-up back room piled high with sandbags—was one of 
the bloodthirstiest Arabs I ever met. He was a thin, morbid 
fanatic with blazing eyes, named All. I won his friendship by 
photographing him repeatedly in the act of firing a Bren gun. 
Thereafter he would often tip me off to the location of extra 
food on the premises. We would steal it together and eat it 
in the privacy of our arsenal. I was careful not to cross Ali, 
for he had a vile temper. I had seen him fly at a Green Shirter 
with a knife; only the brawny Moustafa was able to stop him. 
Sitting on a box of bullets or grenades, I would look at Ali 
with the conviction that I was facing a dormant savage, a 
ruthless killer whose passions were violently suppressed. One 
day, after we had finished a can of purloined sardines, I started 
off impressively with a bare-faced lie: 
"Ali, I have studied medicine, psychology, and the science 
of the human mind. I can tell many things about a person by 
looking at him. You are a very strong and a brave Arab, but 
you are afraid to do what your heart dictates. Tell me what 
it is. Maybe we can do it together." 
Ali looked at me intently, with a savage glint in his eyes 
which made mc uncomfortable . We were alone; he was 
armed, and 1 knew that I was no match for a man whom I felt 
instinctively was a killer. . . . Ali opened up gradually, first 
by confessing that as a boy he had beaten a playmate to death 
because he caught him stealing. Growing up in a Cairo slum 
—with no schooling or formal training—Ali had developed a 
fanatic sense of right and wrong. All wrong was to be punished 
by death in order to end the progeny of wrongdoers and 
eliminate evil from the world. 
"Who will determine what is right and wrong?" I asked. 
"I make the judgment," Ali said. He had been jailed. "It 226 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
was my own fault. I was careless, " he explained, then told me 
this story. He had been delegated to do away with an Egyptian 
official in Cairo. Planning the attack carefully, Ali had made 
a sketch of the official's itiner ary and marked with an X the 
spot from which he was to fire his revolver. In his excitement 
Ali had lost the diagram. 
"I didn't need the paper. I remembered everything," he 
said. "I was at the place an hour early. I had the gun in my 
coat pocket, with my hand always on the trigger. I was afraid 
I would shoot myself, so I went into a doorway to change the 
position of my gun. Four men followed me. They beat me on 
the head, and took me to the karakol. They had found my 
diagram on the street. In my house the police found another 
sketch. They beat me again, and once again in the karakol. 
I confessed because I did not want to be beaten any more. I 
was in jail two years." Ali's appetite had been merely whetted. 
"I want revenge. I failed in my duty once. I must clear myself 
before Allah. I must kill Jews, many Jews. I must kill till my 
arm is tired. I must not stop k illing Jews till the bodies are this 
high. . . ." The wild Arab brought one hand to his chin. 
"I must do one more thing. . . . For this I need your help, 
Artour." 
"Your wish is my command, Ali." 
"I want you to come with me the next time we fight the 
Yahood. When I catch a Jew alive I want you to be with me— 
with your camera." 
"Why do you want me with my camera?" I asked curiously. 
"I want you to take one picture of me holding the living 
Jew by the throat. I want you to take another picture while I 
stab the Jew in the neck. Then I want pictures as I stab him 
again and again in the neck, in the face, in the heart, in his 
belly . . . with this knife!" Ali whipped out a vicious blade. 
"After I have killed the Jew I want you to photograph me 
drinking his blood." 
"While it is still warm, I suppose." With the Arabs in Jerusalem 227 
"Yes, while it is running warm from his body," Ali af- 
firmed. 
"Okay, I'll take the pictures.!" 
What else could I say? 
A HUNTING PARTY 
THAT night Ali, Moustafa, Capt ain Zaki, Faris, and a dozen 
others participated in a party to which I was invited. Ali after- 
noon the Arabs had been carting in clothing and furniture. 
Toward evening, Captain Zaki sent for me. Accompanied by 
two of the gang we walked for several hundred yards until we 
came to a home in a clump of trees. Household goods were 
piled high in the doorway. The doors had been smashed open. 
Inside, I found the boys going through the drawers, sounding 
the walls and floor. 
"This was the house of a Jew," Captain Zaki said. "We want 
you to look at this photograph equipment and tell us what 
it's worth." 
From a drawer he fished out odd accessories, worth only a 
pound or two. 
"Whose home was it?" I asked curiously. 
"We don't know. It's the house of a Jew," Captain Zaki 
repeated. "Now we want you to go through his books and 
papers and tell us if he was a spy." 
The library was in shambles, with books strewn everywhere. 
Many were in German and French, a few in Hebrew. There 
were also numerous phonograph records and art albums. The 
Arabs looked at them, tore out some pages, threw down the 
rest, and stamped on them. The owners had obviously been 
scholars of some sort. In a pile of papers kicked into a corner, 
I found my first clue, a stack of calling cards: "Dr. Albert K. 
Henschel, Dr. Elizabeth Henschel-Simon." Rummaging 
around,  I found an envelope  addressed to "Mrs.  Simon 228 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Henschel, Dept. of Antiquities, Jerusalem." Inside was a let- 
ter on the stationery of the Palestine Exploration Fund, Lon- 
don. It was dated July 16, 1938, and gave details for a new 
museum exhibit case. 
A more revealing letter was addressed to Mrs. Simon- 
Henschel, "Palestine Archaeological Museum." Numerous let- 
ters in unreadable German script bore the return address: 
"Dr. Henschel, American Expedition, Akaba." A letter from 
"Mrs. Rose Pandelides, Chicago," announced the death of her 
husband, "Costa." Mrs. Henschel-Simon's typewritten answer 
told all I needed to know about the couple in whose home I 
found myself: 
We feel so much with you and understand your sorrow. We 
wanted to tell you and Mr. Pandelides who was with us when 
we first saw this country, what  had happened to us and how 
happy we feel. We are grateful to Fate who seems to give us 
some quiet years before trouble starts again. Because this East 
is as treacherous a soil as Europe is. But meanwhile we enjoy 
our work and our little house [the one that we were now in] 
which we have got just outside the town so that we can reach 
it in a few minutes with the car. 
My husband has taken up his a dvertising drawing with good 
success which suffered only through the disturbances, and I 
do again museum work as I did in Germany. As Mr. Rocke- 
feller enabled the work to be do ne on a broader base than the 
[Palestinian] Government would have done by itself, I feel 
very much indebted to America. But if you come East, we 
hope you will come and see us. . . . 
Captain Zaki came over. "What have you found?" 
"Only letters. The Jews here were refugees from Germany/' 
I looked through another handful. One from England, was 
from "Kathrine," to "Aunt Ebeth":  
I had ever so many presents for Christmas and my birth- 
day. Mummy made me a green costume with a tweed jacket With the Arabs in Jerusalem 229 
and bought me a camel hair coat with a hood. Also I had some 
books and chocolates. . . . They have built four Air Raid 
Shelters in our playground, so th at we don't have much room 
to play in. . . . Have you still got any cats in your house? We 
haven't any animals at present. Dorothea wants some very 
badly, but Daddy is rather against the idea. 
I was moved, reading these letters from one stranger to an- 
other. How could one ever foretell the course of life? . . . 
"What are these?" Carrying a strongbox under one arm, 
Captain Zaki brought over a cabin et filled with film negatives 
—photographs of Arab life. It was a precious collection. 
"I would like to have these for myself," I said. 
"We will take it up with the defense committee," Zaki 
answered, stiffly. "We will go back now." 
He turned, strongbox under one arm, cabinet under the 
other, and walked out. Holding a stack of letters, I followed 
him. Night had come, dark and moonless. But not silent. 
Jerusalem was rarely quiet at night. The rat-tat-tat of ma- 
chine-gun and the sharp crack of a rifle mingled with the 
muffled roar of a shell. On this night tracer bullets were 
swishing through the darkness like a swarm of fiery comets. I 
showed the way with a flashlight. Behind us the boys were 
carting away household goods in wheelbarrows and improvised 
stretchers. Zaki and I talked little; we had little in common. 
Since coming to Deir Aboutor he had grown fat through over- 
eating and overindulging. 
"What are you going to do with the books and furniture, 
Zaki?" 
"Sell them in Jerusalem and use the money for arms and 
food." 
Back at the Osborne House everyone gathered around the 
strongbox Zaki had been carrying. It was small, heavy, and 
important-looking. It was passed from hand to hand, as each 
tried with jack-knife and screwdriver to force the lock. The 
Arabs fumed and sweated and cursed, but the combined might 230 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
and main of the Deir Aboutor defense proved unable to open 
a metal box about a foot square. 
"Get the American!" 
"Will you give me the negatives if I open the box?" I bar- 
gained. 
I took a close look at the box. It was shaped like a sardine 
can—only larger and stronger. I laid it upside down, while 
Zaki and Faris put their feet at both ends to keep it steady. I 
hammered the edge of a screwdriver against the metal, and 
within a few minutes had opened the box—much to the 
amazement of the Arabs. 
"You are very clever, Artour," Zaki said. 
"Will you give me the negatives now?" 
The strong box was placed on the table, and the Arabs 
gathered around in anticipation. One by one the articles were 
pulled out. They were a few Pal estinian coins, a folded docu- 
ment in German which seemed to  be a deed to something, 
and a stack of receipted bills. The Henschels hadn't proved 
the fools the Arabs had taken them to be. ... I had my eyes 
on the negative file. Though I tried again and again, and even 
offered Zaki five pounds—a huge sum for a penniless adven- 
ture—he could not induce the others to part with it. 
THE ARABS IN ACTION 
NEXT morning hell broke loose. Up to this time Haganah 
forces had ignored us, apparently unaware of our strong Arab 
concentrations at Deir Aboutor. But by ten a.m. bullets were 
whizzing over our heads. At first they were wild and whistled 
through the trees, but they were soon bouncing off the stone 
masonry of Osborne House. It  was time to duck—and fight 
back. 
Yallah! 
Moustafa, whose leadership up to this time had been With the Arabs in Jerusalem 231 
eclipsed by Zaki's superior political generalship, assumed com- 
mand of about forty men. Bren gun in hand, he waved them 
toward an embankment above a grove where sheep grazed. 
But the sheep had already disappeared by the time Moustafa 
and his men set up their machine-guns. He and the gang made 
a terrific din, firing wildly in the general direction of Jews, 
sending over ten shells to every Jewish shell. Taking advantage 
of the Arabs' passion for firing off their weapons, the Haganah 
deliberately provoked them to fire with all they had, wasting 
their ammunition against entrenched Jewish positions. By this 
and other devices, the Jews time and again succeeded in re- 
ducing the effect of the superior firing power of the Arabs. 
"They are going to attack us," Moustafa yelled, excitedly, 
firing another round. "We must show we are not afraid, and 
have plenty of bullets." 
Promptly at noon the Haganah ceased its fire, but the Arabs 
kept going until their ammunition gave out. I was convinced 
that the Haganah was either probing into the strength of our 
Deir Aboutor defenders, or w as feinting while it planned to 
attack elsewhere. In a few hours the Jewish plan became evi- 
dent. 
We had just finished a meal of bread and cold vegetable 
stew when an Iraqi courier rushed  in excitedly. Moustafa faced 
him. Zaki had been absent during the morning fighting; and 
although he was nominally in charge, he now sat passively 
while Moustafa took over. I thought of how often action ex- 
poses one's true character. 
"The Jews are attacking Katamon! Every man come to 
help!" 
"Yalhh!" Moustafa's roaring voice rallied a rabble of sev- 
eral hundred Holy Warriors. "Yallah, Katamon!" About a 
dozen were left behind with Zaki, including, of course, 
Ismail. The Egyptians and Syrians leaped into trucks and 
armored buses, and I climbed in  on the heels of Moustafa, 
not daring to leave his side. Off we roared toward Katamon, 
a suburb of Jerusalem built on a slow-rising hill. On its crest 232 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
was the Greek Monastery of St. Simeon, whose sanctity had 
long ago been violated by Iraqi troops who made it their 
headquarters. They were part of an estimated eight thousand 
foreign Arabs who had infiltrated into the Jerusalem area. 
From the heights of Katamon the Iraqis had been keeping up 
a day and night bombardment of a sprawling Jewish settle- 
ment, named Mekor Hayim, in the valley below, as well as 
Rehavia, and other sections of the New City. 
Jammed with Holy Warriors, our trucks roared up in time 
to see a group of Iraqis setting up a mortar and begin blazing 
a w a y  t o w a r d  M e k o r  H a y i m .  W h i l e  s o m e  o f  o u r  o w n  b o y s  
dashed up to the crest of the hill, Moustafa and others took 
positions behind barricades and also began to fire in a wild 
and haphazard fashion at the Jewish settlement, which was 
minding its own business as far as I could see, and at the 
moment wasn't attacking anyone. The Arab Legion troops, 
easily identified by their spear-tipped Kaiser Wilhelm helmets, 
and Palestinian police with their black woolen kalpaks also 
participated. Except for these trai ned soldiers and the Iraqis, 
Syrians, and Moustafa, the others were all rabble. They used 
short-range Sten-type guns to fire at objectives a mile away. 
I saw one fellow, wearing enormous baggy trousers, his head 
swathed in a turban, place his rifle on the wall, duck behind 
it, and fire straight into the horizon. He repeated the stunt 
till his ammunition gave out. Quite satisfied with himself, he 
shouldered his rifle and went home. 
Moustafa chose this moment to ask me to take his picture. 
For five full minutes firing ceased along the barricade facing 
Mekor Hayim, while the Holy Warriors lined up for their 
pictures. It almost proved my undoing, because a little later, 
when I had temporarily lost sight of Moustafa, my exposed 
camera caused two Arabs in civilian dress to pounce on me 
and begin hauling me away. "Moustafa, Moustafa!" I yelled 
at the top of my voice. Moustafa emerged from the rear of 
a truck, where he was helping himself to cold lamb and bread With the Arabs in Jerusalem 233 
which had just been brought in. From then on I followed 
Moustafa like a shadow. 
It was dusk when we decided to call it a day. Arabs usually 
retired from fighting after sundown, and expected the Jews to 
do the same. The Jews, however, did the opposite. The 
Haganah did its best work unde T cover of darkness. Sneaking 
unseen upon the enemy, it combined daring with the element 
of total surprise and usually su cceeded in terrifying the Arabs. 
Another advantage of night attack was that the darkness hid 
the numbers of the woefully small—though superbly trained 
—Jewish units. Under these conditions events proved that one 
inspired Haganah commando was easily worth ten average 
Arabs. 
This was true here too. For by nightfall the Jews had cap- 
tured the strategic heights of Katamon and our Holy War- 
riors had clambered into trucks and rolled back to Deir 
Aboutor in the silence and gloom of defeat. Later, from Deir 
Aboutor, we heard the muffled blasting of Jewish sappers as 
they moved forward consolidating their positions. In the 
Monastery of St. Simeon, Jews found instructions in German 
as well as Arabic, a wholly reasonable discovery in view of 
Iraq's history during World War II. (See Chapter XXII). 
The following morning Moustafa took me aside. 
"Artour," he said. "You remember Hamid Sharkaf?" 
I remembered Hamid Sharkaf. I knew him as John Kenny, 
a twenty-one-year-old boy from Glasgow, with red cheeks and 
an ever present smile. Before he deserted from the British 
army on the Arab promise of £15 a month, he had been at- 
tached to the Royal Engineers.  His specialty was mine-laying 
and demolition-bomb-making; he also taught the Arabs how 
to use their British machine-guns. "Hamid Sharkaf" was the 
name he had taken among the Arabs, after the fashion of many 
of the British deserters. 
"He is dead," Moustafa said, genuinely sorry. 
"How did he die?" 234 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"At Katamon. We killed him last night by mistake. He 
wouldn't retreat with the rest of our boys, so when the Jews 
chased him to our lines, we took him for a Jew and killed 
him." 
"He was Catholic," I said. "Who buried him?" 
"The Arab soldiers. They dug a grave in the Moslem ceme- 
tery by the Dome of the Rock, and the imam said a prayer." 
So died—and so was buried—many a British soldier! 
Moustafa went on to tell me of the unfair tactics the Jews 
had employed in capturing upper Katamon. The Jews had 
retreated from a strategic buildin g, leading the Arabs into a 
completely booby-trapped house. A time-bomb had blown up 
Arabs engaged in peaceful Sniping. Mines had gone off in the 
most unexpected places. Buildings had collapsed in mysterious 
explosions. The Arabs were complete strangers to this form 
of modern warfare. They learned while they died. 
The Arab position had now badly deteriorated. The 
Haganah made new inroads into Katamon, and threatened 
seizure of Talpioth, another suburb which adjoined our own 
Deir Aboutor. Once in control of Talpioth, the Jews would 
be masters of the Bethlehem-Jerusalem road, and could force 
us down the steep embankment of Deir Aboutor into the 
Valley of Hinnom. We were virtually the only remaining 
Arab unit with a foothold anywhere in the New City. 
To everyone's astonishment the Arabs were losing on nearly 
every front. Haifa, the leading port in the Middle East, with 
an Arab population of seventy thousand and a priceless oil re- 
finery, had fallen to the Jews within thirty hours. Palestine's 
second port, Jaffa, an all-Arab city adjoining Tel Aviv, had 
crumbled into Jewish hands. Some fifty thousand Arabs had 
fled Jaffa.2 Farther north, Safad, Tiberius, and the fortress city 
2 This flight-psychosis, which preva iled among the Arabs and ultimately 
resulted in the frantic exodus of many Moslems and Christians, is a difficult 
phenomenon to explain. It was a mass hy steria induced by poor morale and by 
fear of revenge and retribution for the Arab massacres and lootings from 
1920 on. 
Arab leaders—particularly in the Mufti's Arab Higher Committee—urged  With the Arabs in Jerusalem 235 
of Acre—which even Napoleon could not capture from the 
Turks—had all been seized by the Haganah in a series of bril- 
liant maneuvers. What innate power motivated these sons of 
David? I didn't yet have the answer from the Jewish side. But 
with the Arabs I had been learning some of the reasons why 
the Jehad was daily proving such a failure. 
Moustafa, however, seemed to have no worries. Toward 
evening one day I found him sitting on a rock. I walked up 
quietly and sat beside him. 
"Things are not going so well with us, Moustafa," I said. 
"The Jews haven't tasted real Arab steel and lead yet," 
Moustafa said confidently. "Artour, you have seen only the 
work of untrained volunteers. You are making a mistake if you 
judge the power of the regular Arab armies from these Holy 
Warriors. What we are doing here is tiring the Jew, worrying 
residents to clear the fighting areas, pr omising them that Palestine would be 
cleared of Jews within thirty days after the Mandate ended. After the Jews had 
been pushed into the sea, Arab leaders sa id, Palestinians could return to their 
homes and at the same time share in Jewish booty. They implied that those 
who refused to leave were pro-Zionist; such people were threatened with re- 
prisals. 
In contrast, I know of instances wh ere the Jews begged the Arabs, par- 
ticularly the Christian elements, to remain, guaranteeing their safety and full 
respect for property. These Christians, however, joined the fleeing Moslems, 
fearing the promised retribution followi ng the promised Arab victory. As an 
instance, the Armenians, who had alwa ys got along well with Arab and Jew 
alike, joined the panicky Moslems, horror-stricken by the memory of the 
Turkish massacres. 
Wealthy merchants, physicians, bank ers, politicians, and other leaders 
were the first to leave. Later came th e poorer elements until, by the time the 
Mandate expired, those re maining were largely only the ill and aged, the 
looters, and the innocents. 
The exodus figure of 750,000 or more Arabs is sheer propaganda, a fictional 
number that cannot be supported by th e facts. The populace in the country 
from Jerusalem north to Jericho was not disturbed by the fighting, nor were 
the Arabs and Christians resident in the congested areas within the quadrangle 
formed by Ramallah, Tulkarm, Jenin,  and Nablus—Palestinian territory now 
annexed by Jordan. It must also be pointed out that many of the Moslem 
so-called refugees were homeless, nomadic wanderers in the first place. Poor, 
nonrefugee Arabs, such as those in Gaza, have claimed refugee status in order 
to qualify for American aid.  236 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
him, keeping him running here  and there until the armies of 
Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, and fighters from Yemen 
and Saudi Arabia and the Moslem countries of North Africa 
join the Jehad." He paused. "Then you will see slaughter, 
Artour. Then you will see us march to Tel Aviv." 
"How long will it take us, Moustafa?" 
"Thirty days—not thirty-one—but thirty days to conquer 
Tel Aviv!" 
I wasn't too sure of this, but I said insh'allah anyway. 
I MEET THE PATRIARCH 
IN THE midst of this growing turmoil, I had a personal prob- 
lem. If, despite Moustafa's conf idence in Allah, the forces of 
war should turn against us, what would I do with my suitcase, 
packed with my precious notes and the invaluable film record 
of my experiences so far? My suitcase was stored in our arsenal, 
where my bloodthirsty friend kept vigil; if the Jews forced us 
to flee, it would be lost. I decided the safest place for it would 
be the Vank, the Armenian mon astery in the Old City, which 
was built like a fortress, and whose sanctity had always been 
respected. 
One morning, therefore, I trudged over with it, gave it 
into the keeping of an Armenian family, and took the op- 
portunity to pay my respects to the Patriarch, spiritual shep- 
herd of some ten thousand Armenians in Palestine. I was 
ushered up a narrow flight of steps to his reception-room. It 
was large, rectangular, thickly carpeted, lined with upholstered 
chairs. On the walls were stately paintings and photographs of 
the princes of my church. Here one seemed to rise above the 
tumult outside and step into a calm and reverential world. 
I faced Guregh II Israelian. He was a short man, wearing 
gold-rimmed glasses, with a long, patriarchal beard that was 
black in the upper portion, graying toward the tip, and com- With the Arabs in Jerusalem 237 
pletely white at the end. A larg e, pyramid-shaped black hood 
rose above his head, and at times seemed to overshadow him. 
It magnified both his face and stature, so that even while sit- 
ting he seemed a towering figure. His deep brown eyes, seem- 
ingly calm, glowed with dormant fire. Beloved by Jew, Arab, 
and Christian alike, he was one of the last of the old-time 
shepherds of the Church who guarded his flock with a pa- 
ternal hand. 
I bent over and kissed his hand, told him who I was, and 
explained that I had brought my suitcase to the monastery 
for safe-keeping. 
"Parov yegar, dughas. Welcome, my son," he said. "You 
come at a bad time. It is a time of tragedy and bloodshed." 
"I hope it will come to an e nd soon, Your Beatitude," I 
said. 
He shook his head. "Passions ar e too deep, and the peace- 
makers . . . they talk, but do little else. Why could not 
Jerusalem have been spared? Why could not war have been 
kept away from the Holy City? Our properties outside the 
Old City are destroyed or seized; the income to support our 
church, our monastery, school, library, and the Armenian 
refugees who are streaming into the Vank, has been stopped. 
What are we to do? . . . Nobody knows what will happen 
after the British leave. We can only wait and pray." 
An attendant brought in a tray of oriental candy and demi- 
tasse, and placed it on a mother-of-pearl table before me. 
I heard a sudden commotion outside the door. A scout 
rushed in, breathless: a group of  Arabs were trying to force 
their way into the monastery! Hurrying with the Patriarch to 
the window, we saw the Arab gang milling about the en- 
trance, wild disorderly hoodlums armed to the bursting point. 
They were banging away at the iron door of the monastery 
with their rifles, screaming to be allowed entrance. 
"They say they will shoot their way in," the scout reported. 
"Asdvadzim, As dvadzim!" My God, my God!" The Patri- 
arch raised his hands in supplication. "Assor vertchu tchika? 238 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Amen on, Amen on gookan!" Is there no end to this? Every 
day, every day they come!" 
I heard the crack of a rifle shot, another, then a third. The 
Arabs were attempting to shoot out the lock. 
From the posture of supplication, his arms raised heaven- 
ward, the Patriarch suddenly br ought his hands together. He 
clenched them tight into two massive fists, then in a mighty 
rage of wrath he shook his fists at the hoodlums. And in that 
act of defiance he symbolized the defiance of the entire 
Armenian people toward the brut ality of the Turk, the tyranny 
of the Nazis, the intrigues and betrayal of those who regarded 
us as weak and spineless because we were not of the Anglo- 
Saxon race and did not sit in the councils of the chosen. In the 
Patriarch I saw an Armenian people fighting its oppressors, its 
betrayers, it tormenters. 
The Patriarch was no longer the disturbed cleric of a few 
minutes ago. He was a fighting man, in full command, the 
leader of his people, the guardian of his church. He wheeled 
around to the scout: "Go tell them that I forbid anybody to 
enter. They may try to shoot down the door if they wish, but 
as long as I am here they will not desecrate our holy Vank, 
they will not spill Armenian blood. They will not enter!" 
I have seldom seen anyone, let alone a Patriarch, so en- 
raged. There was little for me to do but stand by, fascinated, 
and watch the bolt of lightning smite the Arab. How could 
one help but admire this man of courage and fortitude? Surely 
our commanders at Musa Dagh must have been fighters of 
equal rank. . . . The storm wa s over. Into the palatial re- 
ception room there came again the calm of a sanctuary. "It's 
the lawless brigands who are the troublemakers," the Patri- 
arch said to me. "The decent Arabs fear them, and that is one 
reason why most of them have fled from Jerusalem. If I let in 
one, a hundred will follow, then a thousand. They would 
plunder our Vank. ..." 
On that bitter note, I left him and returned to Deir 
Aboutor. With the Arabs in Jerusalem 239 
LAST DAYS OF THE MANDATE 
ONLY a few days now remained until the British mandate 
over Palestine expired. Tension had reached the exploding 
point. The United Nations Trusteeship Council showed 
marked impotence. First, it proposed a truce, which neither 
side obeyed. Then it tried to postpone partition. There was a 
proposal to send United States Marines to enforce—no one 
was sure what. The Council s uggested a special British High 
Commissioner to rule over Jerusalem. Later it thought a Red 
Cross official might do better. A dozen last-minute schemes 
and a hundred speeches were delivered in an atmosphere of 
great theatrical importance—but far removed from the reality 
in Palestine. 
At Lake Success, Sir Alexander Cadogan, the British dele- 
gate, read a telegram to the S ecurity Council stating that "all 
units of the Arab Legion had left Palestine for Trans-Jordan 
prior to the end of the Mandate." I smiled when I read this. 
For I had seen the Arab Legion in Gaza, in Hebron and in 
Katamon. 
Far better than I, the defenders of Kfar Etzion had tasted 
the sting of Legion guns. They, too, knew the truth. . . . For 
weeks these settlers in their hilltop kibbutzim had beaten back 
assaults by the Arab Legion and guerrilla bands. At four a.m. 
on May 12—two days before the Mandate's end—guerrillas 
joined with Arabs from Hebron and the Arab Legion to launch 
an all-out attack on Kfar Etzi on with two battalions and two 
thousand irregulars. They hammered at the isolated com- 
munity and its 164 men and women defenders, with cannon, 
mortars, and heavy machine-guns. The tanks charged sixteen 
times, followed by wave after wa ve of howling fanatics. Kfar 
Etzion sent desperate calls: "Tanks penetrated our rear into 
the farmyard. . . . Overrunning the dining-room and chil- 
dren's house. . . . Swarming in from all sides." Ferocious 240 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
hand-to-hand fighting followed. When Kfar Etzion fell, the 
Arabs found sixty-two dead, forty-two gravely wounded, and 
three survivors. The rest had fl ed to the three adjoining kib- 
butzim—making a combined defensive force of about 350 
Jews. 
In the next few days these kibbutzim, too, underwent Kfar 
Etzion's fate. After their surrender they were plundered and 
burned. Thus ended the tragic saga of Kfar Etzion, the first 
major triumph of the British-trained, British-armed, British- 
led, so-called Arab Legion—while at Lake Success and in 
London, British spokesmen soberly repeated that the English 
and the Legion had pulled out of Palestine. 
On the night of May 13, the last night of the British 
mandate—the night before the Jews would proclaim the estab- 
lishment of the first independe nt Jewish State in two thou- 
sand years—I stood watching the burning buildings of Kfar 
Etzion glowering against the sky. The ravished settlement was 
symbolic of the Holy Land, a Holy  City set afire by the torches 
of colonialism. I watched far into the night, then went down- 
stairs and prepared for bed. Moustafa and I slept on adjoining 
cots. I lay on my cot. Moustafa was removing his jacket. 
"I feel suddenly frightened, Moustafa. I cannot explain 
why." 
"It is because you are afraid of the future. You will see that 
the Arabs will win. Allah is on our side." 
"Do you still believe what you said about Tel Aviv?" 
"Of course. Every Arab believes it. Every Arab knows that 
we will be in Tel Aviv one month from tomorrow. We will sit 
in the cafes by the sea, drink coffee ... eat baklawa and 
enjoy the Jewish girls!" 
"And hang all the Haganah from the trees?" 
"Yes, I am sure of it." 
He paused for a moment, and grew confidential. 
"Artour, I can now tell you our big plans, since they are not 
secret any more. The Egyptian armies have already crossed With the Arabs in Jerusalem 241 
into Palestine, and beginni ng tomorrow will march on Jerusa- 
lem and on Tel Aviv. The Arab Legion will march on Tel 
Aviv from the east and meet the Egyptians coming from the 
south. The Syrians and Lebanese armies will attack from the 
north and northwest, and march on Tel Aviv also. The Iraqi 
regulars will support the Syrians and Arab Legion. You can 
see"—and here Moustafa, quite excited, drew out a piece of 
paper and traced the plan roughly—"how the Arabs will come 
all together at one time on Tel Aviv!" He looked at me 
triumphantly. "Arc you frightened now, Artour?" he said, 
blowing out the candle, and thumping into bed. 
In the darkness I said: "No, Moustafa, I believe you." 
I lay thinking. We were sleeping in the basement wing of 
Osborne House, sheltered from the fire that crisscrossed the 
Valley of Hinnom.3 The shelling continued unbroken, to and 
from Zion Hill, David's Tower, Jaffa Gate, and beyond. It was 
marked by enormous explosions in the night. A few weeks to 
push the lowly Jews into the sea and seize the rich Jewish 
booty? Could 650,000 Jews defy the might of forty-five million 
Arabs, the massed might of the Arab armies? We were on a 
pinnacle of history this night: everywhere last-minute prepa- 
rations were being made for tomorrow, the long-awaited day 
when hated British rule and th e hated Mandate would end; 
tomorrow, when David would be smitten by the Arab Goliath. 
I thought of the night I walked, rainsoaked, in New York. 
It seemed as though that had ta ken place in another world, in 
another time. I had come on this odyssey to learn, to see what 
forces were at work. . . . Here , in the Holy Land, where the 
Prince of Peace was born, violence spoke from every stone, 
every leaf, every ancient, time-hallowed site. . . . 
And thinking these thoughts, I fell asleep, deaf at last to the 
bitter symphony of death played in the City of Peace. 
3 It was symbolic as a valley of death. An altar once stood here to Moloch, 
the god to whom infants were offered as sacrifice. The Alcadema Field of 
Blood was in this valley, as well as th e potter's field of ancient days, bought 
with the thirty pieces of silver whic h Judas, in remorse, flung back at the 
priests. BOOK TWO   
 (CHAPTER X III) 
MEDINAT YISRAEL IS BORN 
"It is because America has such an abundance of 
everything that I have come. I shall not be missed. 
Here they need me. I have come to help, to build a 
new country." 
"Many of my . . . friends have died here. I can- 
not desert them. . . . Israel, their graveyard, will 
become my new home, my country. Every dead 
friend I shall try to replace with a living baby." 
American Pioneers in Israel 
E-M DAY—End-of-Mandate Day—dawned as lovely a morn- 
ing as man could have wanted. Moustafa was stirring. So were 
a score of Arabs on cots and mats. I wanted to be with the 
Jews on the first day of the new Jewish State—to see history 
being made in the New City of Jerusalem. All the American 
reporters were there; our Consulate was there; and there I 
ought to be. It was time for me to take leave of the Arabs 
with whom I had shared experiences so long. I took a last look 
at Moustafa—in the same suit he had lived in and slept in 
and fought in. He was anything but handsome, or neat about 
himself, but I loved him as a friend. Not for his views but for 
what he was: honest, rugged, simple. He had proved himself 
staunchly loyal and understanding, and had saved my life time 
and again. Should I disclose my plans? If I did, I knew he'd 
stop me. I did not want to fight Moustafa. 246 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"I'm going to the Armenian quarter in the Old City," I said 
casually. 
"Come back quickly. There will be heavy fighting. Stay with 
me today or you will be killed." It was just like Moustafa—my 
great big growling guardian Arab. 
Taking my knapsack, I left Deir Aboutor. British sentries 
were gone from the Government Printing House, and the no- 
man's street by the railway station was utterly deserted and 
eerie. It was here that Arabs had often ambushed Jews. The 
British post at the entrance to the German colony was de- 
serted. Only the sandbags and rusty coils of barbed wire re- 
mained. My trouser cuff caught, and I bent down. "What a 
perfect mark for a sniper—Arab or Jew! I'll never know 
which!" flashed through my mind. 
I walked up the fine macadam road toward the Public In- 
formation Office. The danger was now from the Jews who, 
I felt, would shoot at anyone crossing from the Arab side. I 
pulled out a small American flag and held it at arm's length, 
hoping the Arabs from behind wouldn't be able to see it. 
Haganah sentries, after carefully checking my Jewish Agency 
pass, allowed me in. I hurried quickly to the Pantiles Pen- 
sion, directly opposite the Public Information Office. De- 
serted by its owners, the Pantiles had been appropriated by 
American and British correspondents as their residence. An 
American flag flew over it from a rough flagpole. I located 
Carter Davidson, of the Associated Press, who was recognized 
as spokesman for the correspondents. 
I identified myself and explained that I was getting material 
for a book. Could I stay with them? 
Davidson was cordial, "Sure, we have room for you. Move 
in any time." 
I had come at the right moment. A few minutes later, I 
climbed with the correspondents into one of three waiting 
cars, and off we went to Government House, residence of Sir 
Alan Cunningham, British High Commissioner for Palestine. 
He was to depart from Palestine today with the last British Medinat Yisrael Is Born 247 
troops. Government House was a solid, austere edifice built of 
light-colored stone, with a central tower from which the Un- 
ion Jack flew. Quite symbolic, I thought, for Government 
House to be situated on the Hill of Evil Counsel. Actually, 
Sir Alan was liked, personally and politically. With rare fore- 
sight he had tried to mitigate the effects of Ernest Bevin's 
harsh policy, but now it had all come to nought. 
On the spacious grounds outside Government House we 
found the picturesque Highlander Light Infantry, in shorts 
and khaki berets topped with a red pompom, lined up in for- 
mation. Tanks and armored cars spread out around the palatial 
gardens. At exactly eight o'clock Sir Alan emerged, a tall, 
handsome man with pink cheeks and gray hair. He reviewed 
his guard of honor, made a short speech, chatted informally, 
shook hands. The British Broadcasting Company made an on- 
the-spot broadcast, recording th e end of an adventure that 
started bravely thirty years ago. England came humbly then; 
General Allenby entered Jerusalem on foot, and won the 
thanks of millions of Arabs, Jews, and Christians the world 
over for liberating the Holy Land from Turkish rule. Thirty 
years of duplicity and disregard for the interests of anyone but 
herself had dissipated England' s storehouse of good will. In- 
stead of leaving now, as a frie nd, the English were being 
kicked out—their every departin g step cursed by Arab and 
Jew. 
Sir Alan walked to his car. As the ex-High Commissioner 
got into a sleek black Rolls Royce, the Highlander bagpipers 
appropriately sealed the Mandate's  end by playing a long and 
mournful Scottish funeral dirge. The correspondents got into 
their cars, and most of them returned to the Pantiles. 
"ASDVADZ MEDZ EH" 
FIRING broke out on both sides the minute Sir Alan's armed 
cavalcade left Jerusalem. By 9.30 a.m. the shooting had be- 248 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
come alarmingly widespread. It was apparent that neither side 
would wait for the Mandate to end officially at midnight, and 
that the battle for Jerusalem would begin immediately. Sud- 
denly I began cursing myself. What a fool I had been for 
taking my suitcase to the Armenian compound! I should have 
taken it instead to the American Consulate, It would be far 
safer there than in the Old City , which was certain to become 
a center of fighting in a matter of moments. Even though the 
Vank would withstand shelling, I might not be able to get to 
my suitcase for heaven knew how long. 
Could I, at this stage, cro ss from the Jewish to the Arab 
side? If, by way of the back st reets, I reached the monastery 
safely, would I have time to return? The scramble for the 
seizure of strategic buildings was on. The few blocks that 
separated the Jewish- and Arab-held areas were about to be 
converted into a bomb-wrecked no-man's land. Literally there 
wasn't a second to lose, for once the two sides were locked in 
house-to-house combat, not only would it be impossible to 
cross in either direction, but even if—through a sheer miracle 
—I succeeded, I'd have been nailed as a spy. 
I raced for the Old City. Shops and stores were boarded 
everywhere, the corrugated metal covers drawn and locked. 
The streets were utterly deserted. I ran through back alleys 
where the fighting hadn't yet reached and at last plunged 
through Jaffa Gate, one of seven entrances to the Old City. 
I fought my way in against the current of shouting Arab sol- 
diers streaming out to fight the Haganah. 
I arrived breathless before the monastery. Armenian lads in 
Boy Scout shorts and trench he lmets halted me. They insisted 
on reporting me to the Patriarch before letting me in. I argued 
that Jaffa Gate might be closed any minute for civilians and I 
would never get out. Orders we re orders! ... I was ushered 
into the Patriarch's presence on ce more. As he rose to greet 
me, I bent down and kissed his ring hurriedly and, I thought, 
quite irreverently. He was calm. 
"You are welcome to live with us," he said. "We have Medinat Yisrael Is Born 249 
enough food to feed another mouth, especially from America. 
If you don't mind sharing a room, we can put you up. If it 
proves too uncomfortable you can make your way to Amman 
or Damascus." I thanked him, but insisted that I ought to be 
on the Jewish side of Jerusalem with my fellow correspond- 
ents. I'd share their fate, I said, whatever it was. The Patriarch 
gave me his blessing. I dashed down the stairs, followed by an 
Armenian lad. 
"Shood ureh, shood meh," he urged, "Hurry up, Hurry up. 
They will begin. The big bombing will begin now." 
We raced over the cobblestones through a labyrinth of 
passageways and cell-like rooms built of stone, narrowly miss- 
ing Armenians in the alleys. I banged on the door of the house 
where I had left my bag. It was locked! 
"Ammaaan! Ammaaan! Arnmaaan! 
This was the standard wailing call of the Near East, which 
I had heard throughout my childhood, usually accentuated by 
a sidewise swinging of the head and body. I had heard the 
lament from my mother, and an ageless aunt at whose knee I 
was raised. Now, as a grown man in my thirty-ninth year, I 
came out with the lament, Americanizing my agony by in- 
terspersing salvo after salvo of Anglo-Saxon oaths. As the 
Armenian youth had run off to locate the owners, the family 
next door invited me to a cup of coffee. 
"I'm in no mood for coffee. I want to get out of here alive." 
"Gaghatchem, soorj mu humet zek mezzi hed! I beg you. 
Please have a cup of coffee with us." It was the woman of the 
household. 
"Digin, soorji jamanag tche! Ma dam, this is no time for 
coffee!" 
I may as well have been talking to the cobblestones. I was 
a stranger from America, and every stranger from America 
must be honored with coffee. That's all the woman knew. 
"Since you won't honor our home by coming in," she said 
triumphantly, "you will have coffee outside our door." 
Soon her daughter emerged with a tray of coffee and orien- 250 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
tal candy. Simultaneously the Armenian lad appeared around 
the corner, waving a huge key, followed by an old woman with 
a crinkled face. My suitcase had been entrusted to her by the 
family I had left it with, who had since fled to Beirut, I found 
my suitcase under the bed, beneath a pile of blankets. I dashed 
out. 
"Gaghatchem, soorj mu. . . ." Now it was the old lady 
who offered me coffee! 
Back to Jaffa Gate we raced! The Armenian youth ex- 
plained to the guards that I was an American who had to get 
to the Consulate immediately. Th e Arabs, rifles in hand, re- 
fused to budge. The Armenian turned to me: 
"They are saying that the fighting has already begun. You 
will be shot. Both by Arabs and by Jews. You will be drilled 
with holes on both sides of your body. Your body will lie ex- 
posed and no one will venture to get it for burial. I think they 
are right." 
"Please tell them if my hour has come I shall know it very 
soon. If it has not, I shall emerge alive." 
The Arabs understood, for this was the philosophy of Ori- 
ental fatalism. They stood aside, and I dashed out, with my 
suitcase as a shield. It is odd how in moments of stress one 
reverts to the experiences of childhood. I recall that in mo- 
ments of great anxiety Mother used to say: "Asdvadz medz 
eh. Anor tzukeh. God is merciful. Trust in Him." 
"Asdvadz medz eh.'" There wa s absolutely no one else you 
could appeal to at such a moment. I kept repeating the phrase, 
while dodging, ducking, crawling across ruined streets and 
back alleys, a hail of bullets resounding all around me—and 
dragging the infernal suitcase containing, among other things, 
most of the cash I had brought! I reached Julian's Way, the 
lower end of which was in the heart of the battle area. It had 
to be crossed. I did not know whether Jewish or Arab machine- 
guns controlled it, but that detail was immaterial as I rested 
for a minute, then dashed wildly across the upper end of the 
street, into a doorway. I crawled from door to door until I Medinat Yisrael Is Born 251 
reached the safety of the YMCA—a block from the Pantiles 
Hotel. Asdvadz medz eh. Mother was right. 
HIDE AND SEEK—WITH BULLETS 
BACK in the Pantiles, I foun d Jim Fitzsimmons, Associated 
Press photographer, swearing furiously. 
"When you guys left Government House I stayed behind 
to take pictures of the British flag being lowered. I was driving 
back like mad, trying to get my films on the last mail plane 
out of Jerusalem, when the Arabs stopped my jeep at Damascus 
Gate. I told them I was in a helluva hurry, but they just put 
their guns at my head and told me to get out. I was surrounded 
by them, every last sonovabitch armed to the teeth. If any of 
them had yelled Yahoodi, I would have been lynched. They 
drove off in my jeep. I guess it was luck when Major Androno- 
vichl from the Consulate picked me up in his car. Here I am 
—without a jeep!" 
The battle for key buildings was raging furiously. The in- 
stant the last British troops le ft—at ten a.m.—pale-blue-and- 
white Jewish flags replaced Un ion Jacks on every building in 
the Jewish zone. Jewish storm troopers dashed out from build- 
ings where they had been hiding—and, in some instances, 
sleeping—for the last twenty-f our hours. With astonishing co- 
ordination and phenomenal speed they captured building 
after building in the strategic no-man's land area, known as 
the "Bevingrad" zone—ironically named for Bevin, because 
British officialdom living here had barricaded itself during the 
last weeks of the Mandate behind cement pillboxes and 
barbed wire. The Arabs were now being driven back relent- 
lessly, building by building, to  the Old City walls. One mar- 
veled at the speed and ferocity with which the Jews unleashed 
their attack. 
1 Major Nicholas Andronovich, United States military liaison officer. 252 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
The fighting hadn't yet reached the Pantiles area, although 
the Public Information Office building across the street was 
already occupied by Haganah youth in rumpled khaki, dunga- 
rees, and makeshift remains of British uniforms. Most were 
in their late teens, lean, wiry, agile as wildcats. Moustafa and 
the boys of Deir Aboutor kept up a dangerous sniper and 
machine-gun fire, but the Haganah chose not to waste its am- 
munition. I decided to see what was happening at the YMCA. 
When I reached it, by a circuitous route, it was like a morgue. 
Some of those taking refuge there were Moslem Arabs, but 
most were Armenians and Christian Arabs—perhaps eighty 
persons in all. One forlorn Armenian was a priest from our 
monastery, named Reverend Haigaser Donigian. Foolishly he 
had waited till the last moment to embark for Haifa, to re- 
place the priest there. 
"I can get neither to Haifa, nor back to the Old City. I'm 
stranded," he said, dejected. 
"It is dangerous, but I think I can lead you most of the 
way to the Old City by the back  streets," I volunteered. "Let's 
hurry!" 
Cautiously we ventured out, and peered from behind a 
building. Julian's Way, the st reet on which the "Y" fronted, 
was absolutely deserted; with no  firing at the moment, it was 
a silent no-man's land littered w ith roadblocks and barbed 
wire, obviously in Jewish hands. Across the street was a Shell 
gas station. From its direction appeared two French police- 
men in metal helmets, guards at the French Consulate. They 
peered down Julian's Way. 
"If they make it," I said to the priest, "we will try it, too." 
The French crossed without mishap. Reverend Donigian 
and I walked down Julian's Way quite nonchalantly, chatting. 
With the suddenness of a thunderbolt, lightning seemed to 
strike all around us. There were flashes, accompanied by ter- 
rific, ear-splitting claps of thunder. Machine-gun bullets rico- 
cheted from the sidewalk scarcely ten feet to our right. I had 
no idea of Father Donigian's reactions. It was every man for Medinat Yisrael Is Born 253 
himself. I dashed to the nearest  wall and found refuge in the 
facade of a store. The bullets c ontinued their terrifying ratatat 
of death. A determined machine-gunner could have riddled 
my left side, for my body protruded from the shallow shelter. 
Then the machine gun stopped, and there was the silence of a 
murder chamber. 
"Father, where are you? Are you alive?" 
"Are you alive? I'm here." 
I peered out slightly, and in the doorway of an adjoining 
shop I saw the tip of his Armenian nose. 
"The Jews shouldn't have done this to us," I said. 
"Maybe they thought we were Arabs," Father Donigian an- 
swered. 
We waited there, squeezed ag ainst the building, each hold- 
ing on to a suitcase. "How long are we going to stay like this?" 
"I shall make a run for it," the priest said. 
"Let me try it first. You can follow." 
"I'll go first," he insisted. I heard him muttering, and recog- 
nized the words Asdvadz, As dvadz. Then I heard a final 
"Amen!" At the same instant his black-clothed figure darted 
from the doorway and scampered with astonishing speed to 
the corner, around which he disappeared to safety. I felt 
trapped. If the Jewish gunner took us for Arabs, he had by 
now trained his gun on my hiding-place. The priest's sudden 
dash had caught him off guard, but he could guess that the 
second "Arab" would have to make a run for it soon. Was he 
now covering me with his gun? There was only one way to 
find out. ... I was too excited even to pray. 
I dashed out, clutching the black suitcase. The corner 
seemed far away, so I jumped into the first opening I saw. 
I was before a big iron gate, covered with trailing roses. I 
picked one quickly, and added it to my collection of dried 
flowers which I kept in my passport. Then I scrambled over 
the gate, no easy task because of the thorns—and found my- 
self inside a garden, surrounded by a wall. I negotiated this, 
too, and as I jumped down I became aware of figures in a 254 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
doorway. Instinctively I put the suitcase in front of me. Then 
I laughed, for I was facing the two French police cowering in 
their refuge. 
"Mon Dieu! My God! What kind of a war is this?" 
A few minutes later I was at the "Y." Father Donigian was 
waiting there—a disconsolate figure resigned to the life of a 
priest marooned for the duration. 
"You might as well stay here," I said. "You'll be better off 
here than any of us in the New City. At least you'll eat well, 
and the Arabs won't dare bomb the 'Y.' " 
I was partly right. The YMCA was built like a fortress, and 
had been declared an internati onal security zone, operated by 
the International Committee of the Red Cross. It was also 
the residence of the four-power United Nations Palestine 
Conciliation Commission. Despite its neutral position, how- 
ever, it was struck by numerous bombs from the Arab side. 
Few caused permanent damage. None of its refugees were 
killed or injured. The "Y" was better stocked than any of the 
Jewish institutions, but the food was doled out carefully, 
served only to YMCA personnel, the refugees, and United 
Nations and Red Cross officials. 
I walked out feeling lonesome. I knew hardly any Jews, and 
had only just met the correspondents at the Pantiles. I missed 
Moustafa and the friendship of my Arab cronies. The average 
Arab is an extremely sociable human being, capable of great 
charm and lasting friendship. "I wish I had made a Zionist 
out of Moustafa," I thought. "T he Jews would have gained a 
fine ally." I walked through the spacious gardens, a haven 
filled with roses and luxuriant flowers, and after walking down 
an adjoining street, I leaned against a square column of 
masonry, marking the boundary of the Armenian Church of 
the Nazarene, and looked down Ju lian's Way in the direction 
of the Jewish machine-gunners. 
So suddenly that I gasped for breath, a bullet shattered 
against the masonry scarcely two feet from my nose. I spun Medinat Yisrael Is Born 255 
around and vaulted to safety. This  sniper, I discovered later, 
was an Arab firing from the Old City wall. 
With enough adventure to last me for one day, I walked to 
the center of the New City. Foreign flags—including the yellow 
and white colors of the Vatican state—were displayed over 
church buildings, schools, hospita ls, consulates, and even pri- 
vate homes as signs of neutrality. Israel flags were everywhere. 
A few of the shops were decora ted with blue-and-white bunt- 
ing draped over rough Stars of David. Photographs of Zionist 
leaders were wreathed in the Jewish colors. But there were no 
parades; no demonstrations; no firing of guns except on the 
battlefronts. The streets were almost deserted, except for 
armed Haganah vehicles and civilians scurrying about. There 
were no children in downtown Jerusalem. There was posi- 
tively no jubilance as one might have expected after the long 
wait for liberation—since A.D. 70. Jerusalem was solemn and, 
except for the fighting fronts, in a state akin to stupor, refusing 
to believe that the British had le ft, and that Israel was about 
to become independent and free for the first time in 1,900 
years! 
The Jewish Agency Building w as like a beehive. Middle- 
aged men with armbands and Sten guns clumsily though care- 
fully interrogated each incoming and departing visitor. On a 
shop window in Ben Yehuda Street in the heart of the Jewish 
business section, posters warned against wasting water, spread- 
ing rumors, and being on streets unnecessarily. Everywhere on 
walls were death notices. 
Through Zion Square—the Times Square of the New City 
—moved a hurried stream of traffic toward the front only a 
few hundred yards away. Paunchy men raced about in an out- 
fit of khaki shorts, summer shirt, British army beret, a police 
billy, a rifle, whistle, and Sten  gun. The armament simply did 
not become the gray-haired businessman turned soldier. Of 
such men—called Mishmar Haam, civil guard—the bulk of 
the army of Israel was composed behind the front lines. I 256 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
moved on, hugging walls when I could, and racing across open 
spaces. I passed a movie house—the Orion Cinema. The last 
film it had shown was Something to Sing About, with James 
Cagney. The poster was still up in English and Hebrew. Re- 
tracing my steps to the Pantiles, I peeked through a slit in the 
concrete wall built along the street as partial protection from 
snipers and bombs. Jerusalem looked placid from this height, 
but bloody hand-to-hand fighting was in progress in the streets 
below, while from the hills beyond them twenty-five-pound 
bombs were being lobbed into the New City. 
A mortar shell had landed in front of Terra Sancta College, 
maintained by Franciscan monks  not far from the Pantiles, 
and had ripped up the sidewalk. I paused to inspect it and 
photograph a small British flag th rown into the shell crater. 
Trampled Union Jacks were strewn over the streets and tan- 
gled in the coils of rusted barbed wire—flags that but a few 
hours ago were symbols of the law of the land. 
MEDINAT YISRAEL 
SINCE the Mandate ended officially at midnight, May 14, 
tomorrow, the 15th of May, was the proper day to proclaim 
the birth of Medinat Yisrael, the State of Israel. But the 15th 
was Saturday—Shabbat—and the rabbis would allow no trans- 
action of official business, historic though it was and awaited 
for nineteen centuries. So, at four o'clock in the afternoon, 
before Shabbat began at s undown, David Ben-Gurion, till 
then chairman of the Jewis h Agency Executive Committee, 
now prime-minister-to-be, made a simple and moving an- 
nouncement from the Museum Hall in Tel Aviv: 
. . . Pursuant to the decision of the U.N., and based on our 
historic and national rights, we hereby declare the establish- 
ment of the Jewish State. . . . The State of Israel will open 
its gates to immigration of Jews from all lands. It will strive Medinat Yisrael Is Born 257 
to develop the country for the benefit of all its inhabitants, in 
accordance with the social ideals of our Prophets. 
We declare that full civil and political liberty will be en- 
joyed by all citizens, regardless of religion, race or sex. There 
will be full freedom of relig ion, culture and language. We 
declare that we shall safeguard the Holy Places of all religions 
within the area of the State of Israel. . . . 
Even at this hour of bloodshed, we call upon the Arabs of 
Palestine to restore peace in  this country. We call upon the 
Arab citizens to return to th eir homes. We assure them full 
civic rights on the basis of full representation in all govern- 
mental organs of the State. We are extending the hand of 
friendship to the neighboring Arab States in order to initiate 
mutual co-operation. We are ready to contribute our share to 
the revival of the Middle East. . . . 
The assembly at the Museum Hall sang Hatikvah, the Jew- 
ish national anthem. The ceremonies were broadcast, but few 
in Jerusalem heard them, because there was no electricity and 
little time could be spared from the work of offense and de- 
fense. From the zone below "Bevingrad" the fighting con- 
tinued. The Arab was pushed nearer, ever nearer to Jaffa Gate, 
as the Jew—the once beaten, bullied Jew of old—outfought, 
outmaneuvered, outwitted the Arab Goliath, on the eve of the 
First Day of Independence, and on the eve of this Shabbat, 
the fifth day of the month of Iyar, the year 5708 by the He- 
brew calendar. 
I mused on the conversations I had had with Americans of 
Jewish faith who had settled in Jerusalem. I had asked each 
why he had left the comfort of our country to face pioneer 
hardships and even death. 
"It is because America has such an abundance of every- 
thing that I have come. I shall not be missed. Here they need 
me. I have come to help, to build a new country," one said. 
Another, from Chicago, replied: "There are places in Amer- 258 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ica where Jews, Negroes, and dogs  are not wanted, where anti- 
Semitism, discrimination, and race hatred still rule. Here we 
are men. We are fighters. What the Nazis did to us no one 
can do to us here. Israel is our new home—the home of those 
unwanted because they are Jews." 
Miriam from Boro Park, Brooklyn, said to me: "I came 
eight months ago to get my doctorate in sociology at Hebrew 
University. One day my frien d Moshe was killed—cut to 
pieces, and bis body burned. Another day they brought a 
bloodsoaked body to the hospital. It was my fiance. Many of 
my other friends have died here. I cannot desert them. I shall 
stay to take their place. Israel, their graveyard, will become 
my new home, my country. Every dead friend I shall try to 
replace with a living baby." 
A decorated ex-GI gave this answer: "If the German bullet 
had come four inches nearer my heart I'd have been dead 
now. I fought for Uncle Sam because I believed in democracy. 
I am fighting now because I believe in democracy for my peo- 
ple. What is the difference wh ere you fight for these things? 
Since I was born a Jew what is more natural than to fight for 
my convictions here?" 
They fought—the ex-GI, Miriam, the young man from 
Chicago—with hundreds like them from all parts of the 
world. They spoke in a babel of accents but they spoke in 
the one language of freedom. Many  died in this Jewish Revo- 
lution of 1948 in order that democracy might live where de- 
mocracy had not existed since the Creation. Thus was Medinat 
Yisrael watered by the blood of many Jews—and some Chris- 
tian and Arab allies—from ma ny lands, and built upon the 
sacrificial offering of the body so that the flock of Israel might 
live in the sovereign dignity of humankind, for the first time 
in 1,900 years—since Titus, the Roman tyrant, destroyed the 
Temple in A.D. 70! 
All this was foretold in the Bible at least four thousand 
years before the Palestine Arabs fled from the land they had 
"made desolate." Medinat Yisrael Is Born 259 
And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you 
a God: and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which 
bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. 
And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which 
I did swear to give it to Abra ham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and 
I will give it to you for an heritage. . . .2 
Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trod- 
den my portion under foot. . . . the whole land is made 
desolate, because no man layeth it to heart. . . . They have 
sown wheat, hut shall reap thorns: they have put themselves 
to pain, but shall not profit. . . . 
Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbors, that 
touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel 
to inherit. . . .3 
2 Exodus vi. 
3 Jeremiah xii. (CHAPTER XIV) 
LIFE IN THE BESIEGED CITY 
"Portzim! You stand before the walls of Jerusalem. 
For 1,900 years no Jew has climbed them. Tonight 
you will mount them." 
Jewish Commander to His Men 
FROM the moment of birth begins man's struggle against 
death. So with the ancient capital of the newborn State of 
Israel. 
What a radiant and hellish Sha bbat morning, this first day 
of the first year of the first Jewish State in nearly twenty cen- 
turies! Would it be an augury of the future? The Arabs 
greeted the new State by sending over shells, salvo after salvo, 
beginning at dawn, continuing through the day and into the 
long night, and for many days, nights, and weeks thereafter. 
They fell everywhere, all the time—making a low, whirring, 
rolling, hollow, distant thunder audible for an instant before 
the shell crashed, killing the soldie r, the innocent, the old, and 
the young. . . . These weren't the French guns of Fawzy 
Bey el Kawoukjy, commander of the Arab Army of Libera- 
tion, because those barrels could never have stood the pace. 
These were modern, rapid-firing guns. 
Whose? 
The barrage seemed directed to the eastern sector of the 
New City, toward which I now walked, hugging the walls on Life in the Besieged City 261 
the east and south sides of the street, for the bombs seemed 
to prefer the west and north sides. Stray bullets, however, 
came from all directions. I toured the hospitals. St. Joseph's 
Convent, operated by French nuns, and once a school for six 
hundred Arab girls (who since had fled with their parents) 
had been converted into a hospital by Hadassah1 and the 
Jews spoke with gratitude of their co-operation. Near by was 
the former English mission hospital now used as an emer- 
gency clinic. As soon as an ambulance arrived, a corps of at- 
tendants with stretchers rushed to meet it. Then began the 
grisly parade: bodies covered with sheets were earned direct 
to the morgue; those with bloodsoaked clothing were rushed 
to the operating-room. On one stretcher I saw a boy of per- 
haps eleven, with a shock of thick black hair and olive skin. 
His large brown eyes were open. His right arm and side were 
soaked in blood, and the stretcher was crimson. 
He was the image of a little boy I knew back home, and I 
became attached to him. 
"He's badly hurt, but he isn't crying," I said to a nurse. 
"He is too shocked to feel pain. Sometimes," she added, 
"they don't come out of shock. . . . We bury about thirty 
people a day from this hospital." 
They took the boy to the operating-room. For the next 
hour I looked for him in the crowded wards. Finally they 
brought him out. The color had left his face. His brown eyes 
were closed. He was whimperi ng, still under the anesthesia. 
They laid him on a bed that had been used, the sheeting 
soiled. (Two patients were often placed in one bed.) Gently 
the nurse rolled him over on his left side, and I saw that his 
arm was gone. In its place was a thick, round bandaged stump. 
1 Jerusalem's hospitals were financed mainly by Hadassah, the Women's 
Zionist Organization of America. They were equipped with American supplies 
and technical apparatus. The extreme efficiency of the hospital staffs and the 
rapid ambulance service from the fighti ng fronts kept Jewish fatalities to a 
minimum. On the other hand, many Arab casualties were due to woefully in- 
adequate facilities. The use of plasma, for example, was rare among the Arabs, 
but commonplace among the Jews. 262 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
He lay quietly on his side, c onsumed by fever and pain. I 
moved closer to take his picture, and I heard him cry softly; 
"Ima . . , Ima . . . Ima"—the plaintive cry of a boy for his 
mother. I took five photographs, and a strange thing hap- 
pened with them. All came out blurred. It was I who had 
moved. I must have been too moved to hold still. Moved and 
angry. Angry is not the word. Enraged is more apt. Enraged 
that a boy of eleven should have to go through life without his 
right arm. What had he done? Whom had he hurt? 
Above the groaning in the wards I heard another Arab 
shell land near by. It struck near St. Joseph's Convent, whose 
upper floors were later damaged by shells. I ascertained that 
the shelling came from a hilltop a quarter of a mile beyond 
the Garden of Gethsemane. The guns were British guns.2 The 
shells bore British markings. The hands firing the artillery 
were those of the Arab Legi on—British trained. The concep- 
tion of terrorizing the New City with indiscriminate round- 
the-clock bombing was British-inspired. It was planned by 
Glubb Pasha, British commander of the Arab Legion. The 
beleaguered Jews were fighting not only the Arabs, but, in ef- 
fect, the English as well. Not Arab shrapnel, but actually an 
English-made, English-directed shell-splinter had smashed 
that boy's arm. The cruelty of it, and the unfairness of blam- 
ing only the Arabs for a policy instigated by His Majesty's 
Government! The voice was Jacob's but the hands were those 
of Esau! 
I fled into the street. A group of children were playing with 
cartridge shells near a cellar doorway. A bearded old man in a 
crumpled black suit was pasting new death notices on the 
walls of a building. I passed the Nathan Straus Health Center, 
where many Arabs used to come for free treatment. Signs in 
English, Arabic, and Hebrew said: "For all Races and Creeds." 
The memory of the boy haunted me: Ima, Ima, Ima! 
2 On my way to Jericho some time later, I drove past the Garden of 
Gethsemane, and saw these British guns firing from their emplacements on a 
promontory on the Mount of Offence. Life in the Besieged City 263 
I decided to take a stealthy walk toward the fighting front. 
A member of the mishmar haam soon stopped me. He was a 
pale, bookish-looking, elderly man. With a businesslike mo- 
tion of his billy he waved me back. Half-trucks loaded with 
reinforcements, and vehicles completely enclosed with armor, 
dome-shaped at the top, ru mbled by. Ambulances marked 
with the Mogen David Adorn (Red Shield of David) tore 
through the streets, while the Arab cannonading continued its 
terrifying staccato. I watched from a doorway, then hurried 
up the ruined block of Ben Yehuda street, past the high con- 
crete wall, the Jewish Agency Building, and down King 
George avenue, to the Pantiles. 
THE PANTILES—HOME AND REFUGE 
OUR home was a solid structure, handsome by Palestinian 
standards, built of cream-colored stone. Most of the New City 
was built of this durable rock, making homes impregnable ex- 
cept to direct bomb hits. Otherwise the New City would 
never have survived its terrific bombardment. The Pantiles's 
front balconies overlooked the Old City and the Yemin 
Moshe defense area. Another balcony looked upon the Public 
Information Office and Deir Aboutor, where I assumed Mou- 
stafa and the boys were still fighting. Located near the edge 
of no-man's land, the Pantiles was as "neutral" as any spot 
in Jerusalem could be. 
Carter Davidson had wisely anticipated a long siege, but 
being a journalist and not a hou sekeeper, he had only stocked 
up mainly with American Spam, Argentine bully beef, salty 
English cheese, and canned salmon of unknown pedigree. 
Salmon, bully beef, and Spam; Spam, bully beef, and salmon, 
became our constant diet after the cheese, little meat, flour, 
and eggs gave out. We also had a store of beer. Always being 
One who preferred solid to liquid nourishment, the beer did 
me no particular good. To the others it was an elixir. 264 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Carter had provided cooks, kitchen help, housekeepers, and 
waiters. We were not sure who was what, but two Arab youths 
and an Armenian girl named Mary served us in those capaci- 
ties. Our Arab help had no idea of sanitation. A dozen raven- 
ous cats soon discovered our premises, and we had to place 
rocks on the garbage cans. Mary was in her early twenties, an 
attractive girl with large brown eyes, light skin, and a figure 
sufficiently shapely to cause muffled whistling. But Mary's per- 
sonality soon squashed any romantic notions. She had had a 
violent love affair with an E nglish officer, and had begged him 
to take her away. He had left her in the lurch, and she was 
undergoing a pronounced anti-male period. She refused to 
speak Armenian with me, and said she was ashamed to have 
been born one because her parents were so narrow-minded. 
We let her alone. On the night of this first Shabbat, despite 
the fact that the electricity ha d been turned off and she had 
to work by the light of a kero sene lamp, Mary prepared a de- 
licious supper. She baked a pie and served it with American 
coffee—luxuries that were to disappear soon. Including Carter 
Davidson and myself, there were fourteen of us at the table: 
Jim Fitzsimmons, Associated Press photographer, a red- 
faced, hard-working extrovert; Tom Pringle, the third member 
of the AP team, adventurous and fearless; Dana Schmidt, 
veteran New York Times correspondent, lean, studious, a bit 
austere until one learned to know him; Kenneth Bilby of the 
New York Herald-Tribune, a former Army colonel, who was 
always kindly, quiet-mannered, and well-liked; Bob Martin of 
the New York Post, bluff, hearty, a good Samaritan; Cornell 
Acheson of the Indianapolis News, reticent, self-contained; 
Robert Hecox, Paramount Ne ws cameraman, tall, handsome 
and moody; Al Noderer, chubby,  hard-working reporter for 
the Chicago Tribune; John Ca lder, pleasant and likable, the 
Reuters correspondent; and James Hayes of Kemsley News- 
papers, Ltd., whom I thought arrogant and overbearing—a 
dachshund kept him company. Hore and Claire Hollings- 
worth were correspondents for London newspapers. He was Life in the Besieged City 265 
tall, cold, hard, uncommunicative; she thin, parched, blood- 
less, mannish. They later retired to well-stocked St. George's 
Cathedral. I was disappointed that Hayes did not offer to go 
along with his dachshund. 
After supper the fourteen of us sat around the table and 
drank beer under the light of the kerosene lamp. The meal 
had been a quiet one. It wasn't  the grimness of the siege 
which made us subdued. The boys were serious, absorbed in 
their work. Despite their youth (most of them looked older 
than their years) they had been  sobered by experience. All, 
that is, except Jim Fitzsimmons and Tom Pringle, the first 
full of spirit, the second full of mischief. For my part, I've 
rarely been talkative in company, preferring to be a listener. 
I did not work as these boys did. I was gathering material and 
storing it away for future, not immediate use. 
The boys were already frustrated because they could not get 
their dispatches out to their newspapers. The British had 
taken the only transmitter in Jerusalem. No reports got 
through to the outer world, desp ite frantic efforts. The world's 
most sensational story lay buried, causing untold anguish 
among the reporters. Only Arab-s lanted news was allowed to 
leave Amman, the capital of Jord an, some sixty miles distant. 
There was little we could do. After the beer, some of us went 
to our rooms, and others to the roof to watch the fighting be- 
tween the Old and the New City. It was still concentrated 
around Jaffa Gate, but tracers flew everywhere, and shells 
were crashing everywhere. We watched the murderous show 
quietly, seeking cover whenever a shell crashed uncomfortably 
close. 
Sometime after midnight the last of us left the Pantiles 
roof, bid one another good night, and retired to our rooms. 
Being a newcomer, I had a back room, actually one of the 
safest at this time because it did not face the fighting. Dana 
Schmidt and John Calder had front balcony suites. They 
moved their cot to the hallway, placed the mattress on the 
floor, and slept under the bed, behind the double security of 266 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
an added wall and the bedsprings. Amid the world's most 
concentrated and historic excitement, the lot of us, somewhat 
bored, snuffed out our candles and crawled into bed. Outside, 
the new State of Israel, the Arabs, and the British slugged it 
out in blood on the first night of Israel's independence. 
SUNDAY AT TERRA SANCTA 
SUNDAY morning was even more  radiant than the Shahhat 
—and even more frightful! The British Broadcasting Com- 
pany had reported "restrained joyfulness" in Egypt. "This is 
like the Crusades all over again. Only this time the Arabs have 
gone out to save the Holy Land," it said. Cairo boasted: "This 
war will be a war of extermination and a momentous massacre 
which will be spoken of like the Mongol massacres and the 
Crusades." 
Tel Aviv had been bombed by Egyptian planes, and Egyp- 
tian and Arab Legion forces were marching upon both Tel 
Aviv and Jerusalem, bound on their mission of "extermina- 
tion and momentous massacre." The Jewish sector of the Old 
City, which had survived for centuries, had a night of terror 
as Arab gangs attacked its few hundred Haganah fighters, who 
defended some two thousand civ ilians, most of whom were 
elderly orthodox men and women who had refused to leave 
their homes. 
Dressed in a fresh shirt, I wa lked to Terra Sancta College. 
A Franciscan monk opened the door and ushered me into a 
chapel far removed from the hatreds of man. I was alone. 
Fresh-cut flowers graced the simple altar. On my left an oil 
lamp burned. The stained glass behind the altar was radiant 
with living images of His disciples. In a niche was a statue of 
the young Jesus, surrounded with flowers. In this chapel I saw 
no pomp, no pageantry, no gaudy display of gold, silver, brass, 
or foil. There was nothing here to befog direct communion Life in the Besieged City 267 
with one's God. This was Terra Sancta—holy ground. God 
was here in all His glory. In th is sanctuary I found beauty and 
calm such as I had not felt since Palm Sunday in the Arme- 
nian Church in Cairo. Whether I prayed formally or not, or 
what 1 said if I did pray, I do not recall. It is likely that I said 
nothing, for I was too deeply awed with His unmistakable 
presence to desecrate it with my words. Nor do I recall how 
long I remained thus, wondrously moved. It must have been 
a long time, because the chapel grew light as the sun climbed 
to its zenith, bathing the pews, altar, and the niche with the 
young Jesus in dazzling radiance and splendor. 
I walked out and found myself in a large garden. A Jewish 
woman was drawing her bucket from the well. I was jolted out 
of my peaceful trance by the thunderous sound of gunfire. I 
was in the "Holy City," being torn asunder on the holy day. 
In the garden I met another Te rra Sancta priest. Two more 
came: handsome, youthful, vigorous men. They told me that 
the college had once had more than five hundred pupils, fifty 
of them Jewish; that it had b een one of the leading institu- 
tions in the Middle East. Father Terrence Quehn was prin- 
cipal. On a later visit I photographed a shattered window- 
frame against which an Arab bomb had crashed obliquely, 
miraculously missing the interior. 
BEHIND THE BARRICADES 
WALKING down King George avenue I noticed that one 
of the deserted buildings had been occupied during the night. 
It was barricaded with sandbags. A youth in a woolen stocking- 
cap was leaning from the roof. I shouted up at him. 
"Hello! I'm a neighbor from the Pantiles. May I visit you?" 
"Who are you?" 
"American correspondent." 
"Wait. We come down for you." 268 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
We climbed to the roof. Cozy sandbag shelters had been 
erected and a canopy furnished shade for the half dozen young 
men and two Haganah girls—both buxom, and pleasing to 
the eye. One was dressed in khaki trousers, the other in shorts. 
The latter, who had just turned  eighteen, was married to the 
dark, curly-haired leader of the group, a Jew from Poland. She 
showed the Auschwitz concentration camp number tatooed 
above her wrist. Her parents a nd her husband's parents, as 
well as most of their families, had been liquidated. 
"With Europe we are finish. In Israel we begin new life." 
Her husband spoke to her in He brew. She turned to me and 
said gayly: "Moshe wants you know he will be father in six 
months." 
We all laughed. "Congratulati ons. I wish I could give you 
a gift. Wait. For you, Moshe, I have cigarettes. For the baby 
I will bring something later." 
Morale here was high. Many couples in the Haganah fought 
side by side as friends, fiances, and not infrequently as man 
and wife. I guessed that roughly one out of twenty of the 
front-line fighters was a girl. The presence of women, sharing 
risks with the men, was one of the greatest morale-boosting 
factors in the Army of Israel, in contrast to the Arabs who did 
not even use women for desk work. Most of the girls were 
either native-born—sabras—or had been in Israel long enough 
to get over their European experiences and imbibe the in- 
vigorating spirit that the New Land bred. I asked the married 
girl about her companion, who seemed a few years older. 
"She sharpshooter. Verry verry good sharpshooter soldier." 
I decided to make another call—this time to the Public 
Information Office, now in Jewish hands. Skipping from shel- 
ter to shelter, I reached the barbed-wire entrance, and was 
challenged by a sentry. After cons iderable persuasion he finally 
took me to the commander, who turned out to be a youth 
from the Bronx named Meyer who had read Under Cover and 
had always wanted to meet me. Meyer told me that the build- 
ing housed a makeshift transmitter used to broadcast to the Life in the Besieged City 269 
Arabs in the area. He took me to a sniper's room. The win- 
dows were boarded, and the place was dark except for a small 
aperture framed by sandbags. A Yemenite Jew with a short 
gray beard was sitting here, the business end of his rifle point- 
ing through the opening. He had a lean, hawkish face and 
dark Arabic features with deep-set eyes that gleamed even in 
the semidarkness. I took a look through Meyer's binoculars. 
I was staring directly at Deir Aboutor! I could see the top of 
Osborne House and my other old haunts, less than half a mile 
away. Between us was an olive grove and a treacherous no- 
man's land of barbed wire, mines, and sniper posts. I won- 
dered about Moustafa. I wished , somehow, that he wouldn't 
become a victim of the Yemenite's deadly aim. 
A few days later I visited the sniper's room again to chat 
with Meyer. I did not see him. While waiting I edged over 
for another look at Deir Aboutor. The Yemenite suddenly 
pushed me aside: he had amazing force in his spindly arms. 
He pointed to a pile of discolored sawdust on the spot where I 
had just stood. A Haganah soldier explained: "Yesterday from 
this exact spot Meyer was looking out. A bullet came through 
and hit him between the eyes." 
Shaken, I left and walked to the Rehavia residential sec- 
tion. I heard children crying: "Mayim, mayim! Water!" and 
saw them run into their houses.  They came out followed by 
men and women with buckets, kettles, and pots of all sizes. 
The water wagon pulled up at the corner and everyone lined 
up for the precious fluid. Rations were supposed to be eight 
gallons a day. But the cart had been averaging only three trips 
a week because of such accident s as a bomb crashing into the 
wagon or shrapnel knocking out the driver. 
I watched the men and women jostle in line, chattering 
excitedly in Hebrew, while the children scampered around 
with tin cups catching droplet s before they hit the curb. 
There was not enough mayim for the last five women in line. 
They were promised double rations for tomorrow. I watched 
a boy plead with his mother to carry one of the buckets. She 270 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
gave in; the little fellow was manfully carrying the bucket 
when he tripped. The crowd gasped at the tragedy. She 
put down her pail, seized Junior, and gave his backside what 
everyone thought was a well-deserved trouncing. 
The desperate shortage in Jerusalem resulted, of course, 
from the Arab smashing of the water-pumping station at 
Latrun, a point midway between Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The 
Arab Legion, led by English officers, held on to Latrun fa- 
natically. Farsighted Jewish officials had long ago sealed most 
private wells and collected rainwater. Baths, warm or cold, 
were out of the question. The precious liquid was used for 
drinking and cooking. What little was left over was used for 
washing. 
The food situation, too, was becoming critical. The New 
City—with its hundred thousand souls—was encircled with 
what had proved so far to be an  impenetrable circle of Arab 
steel, and convoys again could not get through from Tel Aviv. 
For Passover week in mid-April, the rations had been two 
pounds of potatoes, a half pound of meat, two eggs, a half 
pound of dried fish, four pounds of matzos, a half pound of 
matzoh flour, and one and a half ounces of dried fruit. Now 
it was much worse! 
In the meanwhile, the Palestine Post (printed daily in 
Jerusalem, or mimeographed when the electric current gave 
out) announced the opening of the Law Courts, the first Jew- 
ish Post Office, the appearance of the first policemen, and 
the issuance of Israel's first immigration visa. The State was 
on its way. 
In the Pantiles, Mary announced that she was serving the 
last of our meat, and that flour was getting low. As the pumps 
depended on the local supply of electricity, we had to take 
turns at using the hand pump to fill the reservoir of water 
which supplied the Pantiles. After a while the well went dry, 
and the pump became useless. Life in the Besieged City 271 
THE PALMACH AND PORTZIM ATTACK 
THE BBC announced that King Abdullah had fired a pistol 
across the Jordan border as a signal for his armies to cross into 
Palestine, thus carrying on the fiction that the Legionnaires 
had not been in Palestine before the Mandate ended. The 
announcement, however, caused the Haganah to intensify its 
efforts to rescue the Old City Jews before the full power of 
the Legion was thrown against them. Pushed into an ever- 
tightening corner, they had been undergoing a frightful or- 
deal. The Haganah began its campaign with a sudden attack 
upon Deir Aboutor. Presently reports came that it had cap- 
tured the entire area without th e loss of a single man, sweep- 
ing all my ex-pals before it. My boys had not even put up a 
fight. No one could say that they had not time to prepare. 
Nor could they plead lack of arms, ammunition, or man- 
power. In addition, they had the strategic advantage of being 
on high ground. They had everything in their favor—except 
guts! The braggarts had turned tail without even token re- 
sistance. 
The Palmach—striking force of the Haganah—pursued 
them down the Valley of Hinnom, and up the steep slopes 
of Mount Zion to the walls of Zion Gate (entrance to the 
Jewish sector), behind which the Arabs took refuge. The 
snipers' nests and mortar emplacements that had plagued us 
at the Pantiles were wiped out. We breathed easier after this. 
Schmidt and Calder took their beds out of the hallway and 
back into their rooms. How the Israelis managed to scramble 
up Mount Zion in the face of entrenched Arab positions as- 
tonished us all. 
This achievement was eclipsed by what followed the next 
night. 
Davidson and Bilby left immediately after supper, after 
having been mysteriously absent most of the day. News had 272 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
spread that the Jews had a devastating "secret weapon": the 
"Davidka," named after Davi d of David and Goliath, and 
reputed to be powerful enough to rip through the Old City 
walls, ten to twenty feet thick. "They may use it tonight," 
it was whispered. Somehow I connected the disappearance of 
Bilby and Davidson with the anticipated debut of the 
"Davidka." 
There was something in tonight 's attempt which convinced 
me that it would be mightier than any previous effort. The 
operation was in charge of a twenty-five-year-old sabra called 
Uzi,3 who had led the assault on Castel. Uzi commanded an 
undisclosed number of Portzim— stormers—a special unit of 
the Palmach commandos chosen for the assignment. His or- 
der of the day (or night) was curt: "Portzim! You stand 
before the walls of Jerusalem. For 1,900 years no Jew has 
climbed them. Tonight you will mount them!" 
We watched them from the Pantiles roof. The Old City 
spread before us under moonlight, looked strange, distant, 
infinitely lonesome. Its skyline of spires, cupolas, belfries, and 
serrated walls seemed out of place in a modern world. They 
were bleached by a moon that made deep shadows, every- 
where adding mysterious pools of darkness where the Port- 
zim, unseen, were now crawling their way forward under the 
noses of Arabs. Olive and poplar trees stood out in black 
clumps—each deadly with con cealed snipers. Fitzsimmons 
and I brought out our cameras, ducking frequently at wild 
shots that came our way. 
By midnight Uzi and the Portzim had swung into decisive 
action. As Jewish gunners let go simultaneously, the ancient 
walls thundered back with answering fire. It was like a box 
of giant firecrackers going off all at once in every direction. A 
terrific series of explosions, topped by a mighty volcanic roar, 
sounded at Jaffa Gate as a giant geyser of fire leaped from the 
base of the massive door, followed by smoke and debris bil- 
3 Haganah leaders continued to use alia ses, usually Biblical names, as a 
carryover from the underground days of the British occupation. Life in the Besieged City 273 
lowing into the air. A phosphorus bomb eerily lit the land- 
scape. Arab guns blazed away to  check the anticipated assault. 
None came. Was it a feint? Did the Jews plan to plunge 
through at another point? 
The Arabs continued their withering fire upon Mount 
Zion. From inside the Old City walls rumble after rumble 
echoed into the outer world. The glow from embers and hot 
bricks was constant. Who knows how my people were faring 
in the monastery that adjoin ed the Jewish quarter? What a 
night of terror for its 3,800 huddled occupants! And who 
knows what had happened to the Armenian Church of the 
Holy Savior built near the site of the Lord's Last Supper, 
dating from the sixth century, just outside Zion Gate? It was 
in the direct line of fire, a prime target for the Arabs; as, 
twenty-four hours ago, it had been a prime target for the Jews. 
Mount Zion is regarded as one of the holiest areas in Jeru- 
salem, associated with Christ's last days on earth. He held 
his Last Supper here. After the Crucifixion it was on Mount 
Zion that He appeared to his disciples and his Mother. Mary 
lived and died here in a house that became known as the Holy 
Cenacle. Respect for the holy places in the course of fighting, 
I had come to realize, is a noble but impossible objective. 
Both sides desecrated Christian and Jewish shrines if the sites 
interfered with, or proved them selves valuable for, military 
operations. After the shooting due respect was accorded, 
apologies proffered, sometimes a guard posted, and warning 
signs placed in order to: (a) assuage stricken consciences; 
(b) present a respectable front fo r the sake of world opinion. 
I learned that neither virtue nor hypocrisy are exclusively 
Arab or exclusively Jewish traits. 
From the Pantiles rooftop I looked upon the blood-letting 
taking place on "sacred" ground. Could anything have been 
more savage in a supposedly "Holy City?" Seven miles away 
in Bethlehem, Christ was born. He came to Jerusalem over 
the road which was now spiked  with roadblocks, dragon's- 
teeth, mines, barbed wire. All about me the holiest shrines 274 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of Christendom, Jewry, and Moha mmedanism were being des- 
ecrated. I had seen so much hatred, fanaticism, hypocrisy, and 
bloodshed in Jerusalem that I doubted I could look upon it as 
anything but a city of carnage and death. When the devout 
pilgrim utters Jerusalem, Yerushalayim (Hebraic) or EI Kudz 
(Arabic), the word trembles on his lips, and he is swept by 
ecstasy. A reporter cannot live by tradition and sentiment 
alone. Facts are facts. Guns arc guns. Men with their brains 
and flesh ripped out by shrapnel their bodies mutilated and 
left to rot and stink under the sun speak more realistically of 
the spirit of the "Holy City" than the blind emotion of pil- 
grims. 
THE BREAKTHROUGH! 
ZION GATE became the focal point now. Since midnight 
a steady, rhythmic barrage had concentrated upon it. Then, 
about two a.m., a ponderous and massive projectile of some 
kind was shot with a blast from the dark pools of the Yemin 
Moshe quarter below us, recurring at about three-minute in- 
tervals. When it crashed agai nst the Gate and at various 
points along the wall—the maximum range could not have 
been more than five hundred yards—the earth and the fir- 
mament shuddered. Was this the "Davidka"? A giant flash 
suddenly leaped up from the Armenian monastery, and my 
heart twinged. Had a "Davidka " been misdirected there? 
How many died? What irreparable damage was done to the 
ancient cathedral? The painful tragedy of the Armenians' po- 
sition: caught between two fires, pummeled by both sides in a 
war in which they had no interest, and which was bound to 
hurt them more than either of the principals. 
I looked at the time. It w as three o'clock. I had been 
on watch for six hours. At exactly 3.15 a.m. two young 
sappers crawled to the hinges of  Zion Gate, carrying dynamite Life in the Besieged City 275 
charges on their back. As they withdrew behind protective 
fire, an earth-quaking explosion ripped the giant gate from its 
moorings, shattering sandbags, blowing wire, stone, and scrap 
metal sky-high. 
The Portzim stormed their way past the inner ring of Arabs 
and established contact with the ghetto Jews four hundred 
yards inside Zion Gate. For the next hour reinforcements, 
food, and medicine poured in, and the wounded were brought 
out. Water and ammunition were the greatest need. Eyewit- 
nesses found the morale within still excellent. Only the aged 
orthodox Jews wanted to surrender. 
As the dawn broke over the walls, the Portzim retired and 
the Arabs dared to mount the walls again, spitting their fire 
over the breached Gate. 
The sun burst forth over the crest of the Mount of Olives, 
accompanied by an uneasy wind. A flaming orb showed for a 
minute, then buried itself in the gray cloud banks that encir- 
cled the embattled city. The Arab flag was still flying from the 
Citadel. Over the Dormition Church on Mount Zion and 
the adjoining property we now saw the Vatican flags. One of 
the flagpoles was grotesquely bent. Was this, too, a symbol? 
The Vatican flag had provided little immunity. Who cared 
about anybody's flag at this time? The Arabs made fortresses 
of the Pope's property until driven out by the Jews who, in 
turn, used the property the same way, looting what the Arabs 
had not. C'est la guerre. War makes the Christian and the 
Moslem savage. Why should the Jew be different? 
EMERGENCE OF THE "NEW" JEW 
I HAD guessed that five hundred Portzim had assaulted Zion 
Gate. To my astonishment—and I verified the figure care- 
fully—not more than 125 had taken part. Superbly trained, 
armed to the teeth with new Czech rifles, grenades, Sten 276 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
guns, sidearms, and grappling irons, each of the Portzim was 
easily worth twenty Arabs. 
As for the "Davidka," it had shattered Arab morale with 
its extraordinary thunder, the li ke of which no Arab had ever 
heard. Eyewitnesses reported hear ing at least one Arab howl 
Allah, Allah, and run! The "Davidka"—of which fifteen had 
been fired—had an over-all length of about four feet. It 
looked like a combination rocket and mortar. It was whis- 
pered that its parts were being flown daily from Tel Aviv and 
assembled in Jerusalem. 
A truckful of Portzim drove by the Pantiles, and from my 
rooftop I was able to get a good look at these amazing fellows. 
They were a rough-and-tumble bunch, uniformly young, 
averaging about nineteen years, grimy and disheveled, as 
though they had just come from a free-for-all campus tussle. 
They were dressed in half a dozen shades of khaki, in Ameri- 
can and British uniforms, fatigue  clothing, camouflage suits, 
overalls. Some wore helmets, others knitted stocking-caps. 
A short time ago they had been carrying books to school. 
Fighting with the precision of  a well-coached eleven, in 
small, well-drilled teams, they usually attacked at night for 
two reasons: first, to hide their small numbers; second, to 
add the element of surprise to th at of terror. Frequently they 
added the illusion of greater strength by noise-making devices, 
one of which—I saw the instrument—simulated a rapid-firing 
machine-gun. By such ruses as thes e, adroit diversionary tac- 
tics, superb cunning born of necessity, extraordinary profi- 
ciency in the use of small arms, and a brand of courage rarely 
paralleled, the Palmach and its supercommando Portzim be- 
came the terror of Arabs from Dan to Beersheba. They were 
a symbol of the "new" Jew. 
Neither the Haganah nor Palm ach "happened" overnight. 
Groundwork for Haganah's role in the war for independence 
was laid in World War II, when more than 120,000 Jews— 
men and women—out of 400,000 then in Palestine registered Life in the Besieged City 277 
for service with the Allies.4 About 26,000 actually served as 
commandos, parachutists, inte lligence agents, and in nu- 
merous other capacities. Especi ally trained Haganah units 
performed dangerous missions for the Allies behind the en- 
emy lines. Hundreds received priceless training at British 
hands,5 A typical instance was that of Moshe Dayan, who in 
1939 was jailed for engaging in secret scouting work. He was 
released in order to fight for the Allies, and lost an eye on a 
mission to Syria. Later, as Colonel Dayan, he served as com- 
mander of the Israeli army in Jerusalem. 
The Portzim paused in front of the Pantiles for another 
truck to catch up. Like fighting gamecocks they now crowed 
in the song of victory—Song of the Barricades; 
On the barricades we will meet at the last 
And lift freedom on high from the chains of the past; 
Rifle on rifle our guns will salute 
Bullet on bullet our guns will shoot. . . . 
What I saw on the night of the breaching of Zion Gate 
convinced me that I had witnessed an entirely new and re- 
generated species of Jew. Israeli is perhaps the better word. 
Here in the ancient homeland, the fighting, colonizing, and 
civilizing instincts were blossoming in full. No longer bound 
to the chains that linked them to the humiliation of the yel- 
low badge and to the torments they endured in the Middle 
Ages, the Jews of Jerusalem emerged into the greatness inher- 
ent in every man—every Arab, every fellah, everyone con- 
ceived in His image—whenever man is fully liberated from 
the shackles of tyranny. Men were made greater than them- 
selves, as during the period of our own War of Independence. 
4 Contrast this performance with that  of about 9,000 Arabs (outside the 
Arab Legion) who at first enlisted with the British, but most of whom later 
deserted at the behest of the Mufti. 
5 The identical opportunity was open to  all Arabs. The Mufti, however, 
was engaged in extensive Nazi propaganda and sabotage, and warned Arab 
youth against any aid to the Allied cause. See Chapter XXII. 278 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
The next night I saw the Portzim at a Menorah Society 
social. Here I saw them play as hard as they had fought. They 
danced jigs and horas for hours. Among the girls there were 
no wallflowers. They were self-possessed and mature at fifteen. 
This was the new Israeli genera tion—marked by a radical con- 
ception of woman's role in society. No longer the retiring, 
submissive woman of the Middle East—nor the enslaved, 
bullied, chattel Arab woman—but an equal partner of the 
man, whether at the front, at home, or at play. In this sorely 
besieged city, amid the rain of death and bombs, it was thrill- 
ing to see the linking of the hand of man with that of woman. 
Here was a partnership that en ergized both, and gave to each 
the fighting faith and strength to level mountains and work 
miracles on their native soil. (CHAPTER XV) 
A WEEK OF AGONY: 
A CONSUL IS MURDERED 
 
"In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou 
not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. . . . 
for I will make you a name and a praise among all 
the people of the earth, when I turn back your cap- 
tivity. . . ." 
Zephaniah iii 
SUDDENLY the war claimed as victim the highest Ameri- 
can official in Jerusalem! 
Early Saturday afternoon, May 22, our popular Consul- 
General, Thomas C. Wassen, who was also a member of the 
UN Truce Commission, was striding across a clearing midway 
between our Consulate and the YMCA when he was shot in 
cold blood at a spot that I had crossed and recrossed many 
times. The consul's bullet-proof vest did him no good, for the 
missile, fired from close range by an expert marksman, passed 
through an unguarded spot—the armpit. He was taken to 
the Hadassah clinic where I ha d seen the eleven-year old boy; 
and there he died the next day. Almost at the same time came 
word of another murder, said to have been committed by 
mysterious snipers at night—that of an American sailor, Her- 
bert C. Walker, also attached to our Consulate. Both murders 
were never cleared up, and su spicion wavered between mem- 280 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
bers of the Stern Gang and Arab snipers. It was difficult to 
voice any conclusion. 
I went to the double funeral on a terrifying day, when 
bombs and mortar shells rained upon the New City as never 
before. Although both victims were Protestant, the services 
were held in the yard of the Santa Maria Convent of the Sis- 
ters of the Holy Rosary, b ecause the convent adjoined the 
American Consulate. Our flag hung at half mast—a tattered 
flag, its edges frowzy, and the lowest stripe ripped from it and 
dangling independently in the wind. 
Both caskets were draped with the American flag and with 
wreaths. Attending were Walker's buddies in spanking white 
middies, members of the consular staff, Israeli and foreign 
officials, Red Cross and UN re presentatives, American corre- 
spondents (whom I had never seen neatly dressed and well- 
shaved) a guard of honor of Jewish MP's, and one woman, 
wife of the Belgian Consul—about  forty-five persons in all. 
The services were brief and nervous. Everyone knew that a 
shell might crash in our midst at any moment. The anti-Amer- 
ican maniac or maniacs who had murdered these two innocent 
men might decide to stage a massacre: so many Americans 
would never gather in one spot in that area again. 
The twenty-third Psalm was re ad amid the incessant crash- 
ing of shells and the whistling of bullets overhead. When the 
services were ended, we all filed past the biers and went our 
way. 
The Consul's body was laid away in a crypt adjoining the 
Consulate, while Walker was buried temporarily beneath a 
clump of trees in the convent garden. Twelve of his buddies 
lined up beside the grave and paid their last respects as the 
body was lowered. My last memory is the figure of Joseph 
Przywitowski, Consulate guard from Chester, Pa., standing 
over Walker's grave, his right arm akimbo, in his left a neatly 
folded Navy flag. He was alone under the arbor, a disconso- 
late figure standing over the freshly dug grave of his mur- 
dered friend. A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 281 
"BECAUSE I AM AN ARAB SPY" 
THE battering of the Jewish area in the Old City con- 
tinued mercilessly. The second anniversary of Abdullah's 
coronation as king of Trans-Jordan was approaching, and he 
wanted to be crowned king of Jerusalem on that day. The 
Arab Legion redoubled its efforts. Into the Old City, into an 
area comprising about ten city blocks, they poured barrage 
after barrage. Those trapped inside sent desperate calls for 
reinforcements. At night they shot red smoker rockets as dis- 
tress signals. I saw five go up in one night! The Arabs saw 
them too, and kept the cannonading going without respite. 
One evening I visited at the ho me of some Jewish friends 
—Shulamit Marash and her mother. The electricity was off. 
and light came from candles. One window of the apartment 
had been cemented with brick,  save for a ten-inch space on 
top for ventilation. "A bullet came through that opening the 
other night," Shulamit said, and pointed to the chipped wall. 
At ten o'clock the electricity suddenly came on. A bulb 
dimly lit the room, and we snuffed out the candles for later 
use. Radios blared out all over the neighborhood. "Excuse 
us," Shulamit said hurriedly. She and her mother ran franti- 
cally around the house, and her mother put on water to boil. 
In another pot she dumped shrive led vegetables, a small piece 
of meat, a large beef-bone, and so prepared stew. The little 
radio brought in gay music from Tel Aviv. The electric light 
alternately grew brighter, then dimmer. At about eleven 
o'clock it flickered uncertainly and went out, and the Mar- 
ashes settled back in the candlelight dusk. It was nearly mid- 
night when I groped my way out of the door. My battery 
flashlight was dead. Matches were precious. I walked to the 
Pantiles, after twice undergoing inspection near the Jewish 
Agency building. 282 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Why are you out so late?" one of the guards asked. 
"Because I am an Arab spy," I said. 
HUNGER 
OUR food was all but gone at the Pantiles. Only a few cans 
of salmon remained. We had no more bread, no more flour, 
no more cheese. The boys were down to their last case of beer. 
The cats had multiplied and were prowling around, gaunt, like 
huge rats. Cornell Acheson, of the Indianapolis News, and I 
spent one morning carting loads of accumulated tin cans and 
refuse to an empty lot and burn ing them. Al Noderer of the 
Chicago Tribune stayed in bed, recovering from injections 
for typhus, typhoid, and cholera. Most of us had already had 
the same dosage. 
My mind went back to 1919, when my parents were living 
in the suburbs of Istanbul. French occupation troops, white 
and Senegalese, moved in. In a few weeks' time all the cats dis- 
appeared, including our pet. No one could explain the mys- 
tery until one morning I chanced to a open garbage can and 
discovered piles of vertebrae and heaps of cat fur, among 
which I recognized the pelt of our pet. Weeping, I brought 
the skin home. I wondered if I should have been more con- 
siderate toward the Pantiles cat s, perhaps even fattened them 
a bit. . . . 
In the afternoon I wandered off to forage for food. Stop- 
ping at two grocery shops, I was asked for my ration cards. I 
had none; at the Pantiles none of us had taken the trouble 
to get them. A third grocer helped me out with a single wafer 
of matzoh. "It's against regula tions, but I do it only because 
I have a son and daughter in Brooklyn." I had thought I'd be 
able to buy food with a display of American dollars. But the 
caliber of Israeli patriotism was high. I got nothing. There A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 283 
was no profiteering, no hoarding. Except for some children, 
there wasn't a single well-fed Jew in Jerusalem. Everyone was 
as hungry and unwashed as his neighbor. 
I tried the YMCA. Again, no luck. No one knew how long 
the siege would last, and "Y" officials held strictly to their 
policy of doling out food only to those entitled to it. I stood 
in front of the reception desk. 
"I'm hungry," I called out aloud. "What is a man to do?" 
A figure came toward me. It was Mr. Siraganian, an Arme- 
nian missionary who had once been with the Bible House of 
the British and Foreign Bible Society. When the Haganah 
had broken into the Society building in Jerusalem, Siraganian 
had sought refuge in the YMCA with his aged mother. 
"These are bad times," the missionary said. 
"Very bad. How I wish I had stayed with the Arabs. Right 
now I'd be eating shish-kebab,  and pilav with yoghourt. How 
I could eat kebab—the whole lamb, head and all, I could eat 
at one sitting." 
"You must be very hungry," Siraganian said, visibly 
touched. 
"In twenty-four hours I have  had only a piece of matzoh. 
Is this the way for an Armenian  to look, especially an Arme- 
nian from America? Ahh, how I wish I were back home." 
"Indzi hed yegou. Come with me." Siraganian said, quietly. 
Together we went down the stairs to a large basement. 
Siraganian looked around furtively, then went straight to his 
mattress, laid on the floor, and from beneath the pillow took 
out a half loaf of bread. 
"I had saved it against worse days," he said. "You may have 
it." 
I could not refuse. I had come here for food, and here it 
was! I offered him that useless medium—money—in grati- 
tude. 
"I beg of you, don't insult me," the missionary said. 
"Please, on your way out, don't let anyone see the bread." 284 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I broke it in half and hid the pieces inside my shirt. Find- 
ing a secluded place in the lovely gardens, I devoured part of 
the first half. Munching, I arrived at the Pantiles. 
"What are you eating?" one of the boys asked. 
"Stale chewing-gum I found in my pocket." 
I wrapped the remaining bread in paper and placed it on 
my closet shelf. But when I returned to it for supper, half 
was gone. I didn't know whom to suspect and said nothing 
about it, for morally, I should have shared the loot with the 
boys.1 
The few restaurants in Jerusalem still open a few hours a 
day served watery soup, tiny slivers of meat, dehydrated po- 
tatoes and other dehydrated vege tables, a glutenous substance 
called jam, a colorless tepid water called coffee, and half a 
slice of bread—for $2.25! The waitress was in uniform, off 
duty from the army. The bread, usually blackish and musty, 
was down to five ounces a day. When word got around that 
meat was being served at a restaurant, the place immediately 
became jammed. Few ate more than eight hundred calories a 
day. In one instance a grocer told a customer that some of his 
food was wormy. "Never mind," came the retort. "It's better 
for me to be eating the worms than for the worms to be eat- 
ing me." 
With water precious and laundering practically impossible, 
men wore their darkest shirts to hide the dirt. The women 
began to look shabby, their clothing wrinkled, spotted, gray- 
ish. Both men and women frequently had to sleep in their 
clothes to be ready to rush to shelters, so that rumpled cloth- 
ing was quite the vogue. Toilets remained unflushed, adding 
to the odors from unwashed bodies. Garbage remained uncol- 
lected, adding to the filth accumulating in gutters and streets. 
The hot winds from the desert ci rculated the stench they 
helped create. 
But people who looked dried up, washed out, and worn 
1 A year later, when I met Jim Fitzsimmons in New York, he said, "Re- 
member that bread you hid in your cl oset? Well, I swiped some of it." A Week of Agony; A Consul Is Murdered 285 
down still kept filling the blood banks. Children still went to 
a school, usually in a cellar; mothers dashed out to serve as 
nurses or as civil guards, leaving their offsprings at nurseries. 
THE GLAMOROUS LIFE OF A CORRESPONDENT 
BY THIS time the American correspondents were almost 
beside themselves at their help lessness. Their colorful, dra- 
matic stories of the defense of Jerusalem, of the breaching 
of Zion Gate, the miraculous Jewish successes on the Jeru- 
salem fronts and the indiscriminate bombing of civilians— 
all piled up in wire baskets on the censors' desks, and re- 
mained there. Displaying no sense of public relations, 
Haganah press officials thought only in stiff military terms. 
Jim Fitzsimmons and Tom Pringle, the Associated Press 
photographers, and Robert H ecox, the Paramount News 
cameraman, probably suffered most. Jim and Tom took hun- 
dreds of photographs, neatly captioned and carefully wrapped 
their precious negatives, and hopefully turned them in. Noth- 
ing happened. The negatives gather ed dust side by side with 
the dead copy of the correspondents. 
Hecox was bursting to have the exclusive material he had 
shot developed and shown in American theaters. One night—- 
I suspect he was fortified with a bottle or two of beer—he set 
out on foot with his camera and film, determined to walk 
across the mine fields and enemy lines to the Old City, thence 
to Amman to mail his stuff home. 
"Good-bye!" Bob said. 
"So long, Bob. Hope you make it." 
Three hours later he was back, unhurt, with his camera 
and film intact. He was consid erably sobered up and went 
right to bed. 
What I attempted the next day was even more rattle- 
brained, because I tried it in daylight. I don't know what pos- 286 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
sessed me. Perhaps it was an expression of the contagiously 
crazy mood that overcame most of us in Jerusalem—nature's 
way, I suppose, of relieving the tension and frustration of be- 
ing cooped up at the Pantiles, knowing we were completely 
surrounded—the hunger, anxiety, fear, and round-the-clock 
uncertainty day after day, with no relief in sight. If we hadn't 
done the absurd things, each in his own way, perhaps some of 
us would have snapped. 
The idea occurred to me to visit Deir Aboutor. I wanted to 
see what has happened to my old headquarters, the Osborne 
House. The Jews now controlled Deir Aboutor: but what 
about Moustafa? Killed? Take n prisoner? I hoped he had 
somehow been spared. ... It was an exceptionally lovely 
morning and firing seemed to have quieted down. I washed, 
shaved, put on a chic T-shirt, polished my shoes, even picked 
a flower from the garden, and was ready for my stroll. 
White shirt gleaming in the sun,  I walked past the Public 
Information Office and found myself amid a clutter of road- 
blocks, sandbags, rusty barbed wire, and rubble. Dead ahead 
were the Old City walls. To my left was the Yemin Moshe 
quarter, with an abandoned windmill serving as a lookout 
and Jewish sniper's post. The morning looked harmless. God 
was in His heaven, and I had no animus against anybody. I 
stretched my arms, took a few deep draughts of Jerusalem's 
crystal-clean air, and already felt freed from tension. I waited 
at the edge of an olive grove to see if anybody would shout at 
me, or blow a whistle and wave me back. When nothing hap- 
pened I walked on toward my old haunts on Deir Aboutor. 
Halfway across the olive grove I stopped uneasily. I felt I 
was being watched, no doubt by friendly Jews. I thought, let 
them watch. There was a brief clearing of tall grass and rocks. 
I skipped across it, humming. Then it came—the whistling 
whirr of a bullet, followed quickly by another. I flattened on 
the ground, then realized that I was providing a better target 
than while standing. I was completely exposed to snipers on 
the windmill as well as the Old City walls. I scrambled up and A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 287 
dashed to the first olive tree, taking cover behind it. It was a 
young tree, its trunk no more than eight inches thick. Cer- 
tainly I was wider. My rear and front protruded, but there was 
nothing I could do. 
The sniper—or snipers—found me. Bullets now whistled 
through the tree, tearing branches and leaves, sending bits of 
both showering on my head. I pressed tighter against the tree, 
breathed in short, rapid gasps to keep my chest expansion at a 
minimum. But I could do nothing to pull in my back side. 
Where were the snipers—on the windmill, or the Old City 
wall? If I knew, I could protect myself better by shifting my 
body accordingly. 
A bullet which I didn't hear tore a twig that bounced off my 
right shoulder. I was sure now that I heard a dull thud on the 
other side of the trunk. Perhaps I imagined it. But suppose a 
bullet pierced the eight-inch trunk and lodged inside me. The 
idea was highly distressing. Equally distressing were the first 
violent symptoms of an attack of diarrhea, induced by fear. 
The spasms grew in violence and became almost uncontrol- 
lably painful. 
"They won't get me like a s itting duck. I'm making a break 
for it. The snipers can't get me while I'm running unless they 
have a machine-gun." 
About one hundred feet to my right there seemed to be a 
long, rectangular hole. It might have been a deserted trench. 
It looked like a coffin. Bent over with pain, I dashed across the 
rough ground and threw myself into it, safe. It was lined with 
dead branches, rocks, and tin cans. . . . 
After a while—after I had given the sniper plenty of time to 
think he had got me—I dashed behind a tree. I skipped my 
way back—from tree to tree—into the waiting arms of two 
Jewish sentries. "We have been watching you," one of them 
said. 
"I hope you didn't see everything," I said. "I was really 
frightened." 
"We saw everything. We were looking through binoculars." 288 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Where were the snipers?" 
"On the Old City wall," the sentry said. "How could they 
miss seeing you in your bright shirt? You had better come 
with us. . . ." 
I had no difficulty in clearing myself with the Jewish au- 
thorities. But I could not answer their query: "Why did you 
do it? Don't you know that the field was mined, that Arab 
snipers are everywhere? Why did you do it?" 
"I don't know," I kept saying. "But I feel better now . . . 
calmer . . . relaxed!" 
"Last night one of you Americans tried to walk to the Arab 
lines. Today it's you. Who will it be tomorrow? Must we have 
special MP's to watch over you Americans?" 
". . . CONTINUE TO STAND FAST" 
JERUSALEM was a no-man's land, a city detached from the 
rest of the world, suspended amid the Judean hills and left to 
shift for itself. Literally nothing went out: nothing came in 
save what was brought in a tiny Piper Cub plane that sneaked 
in nightly from Tel Aviv—probably carrying confidential papers 
and the most urgently needed supplies—and landed on an emer- 
gency airstrip in the New City outskirts. Thousands of letters 
with the bright new Israeli stamps lay in bundles in the post 
office. Morale-boosting posters with Biblical verses appeared 
on the billboards: "For I will defend this city to save it." An- 
other: "In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou 
not: and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack. ... for I will 
make you a name and a praise among all the people of the 
earth, when I turn back your captivity. . . ." From Tel Aviv 
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion exhorted: "It is absolutely 
essential that Jewish Jerusalem shall continue to stand fast. 
Be strong and of good cheer." 
How much longer could the Jerusalemites take it? Would A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 289 
they ever answer in kind—with twenty-five pounders, or with 
one-hundred-pound shells like t hose British shells which the 
Arabs later rained on the residential quarters? Would the 
ribbon of blood running down the street into the gutter ever 
be cleaned up? 
If only the Arabs had known how desperate was the plight, 
how thinly stretched the fighting lines, how sparsely manned 
the defenses, how limited the ammunition and supplies of 
gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, and electricity, how meager the 
food and water, how weary the defenders. If only they had 
known how close they came to piercing the New City de- 
fenses. One time the Legion counterattacked, leading with its 
tanks, followed by a long line of armored cars and troops, de- 
termined to recapture the important Notre Dame de France 
compound, a bulwark of the Jewish defense. The Jews fired 
a few rounds with their one anti-tank Piat, which had been 
hurriedly borrowed from another front, Then the overworked 
gun jammed! The Jews girded for the inevitable hand-to-hand 
fighting. The Legion commander became suspicious of the 
Jews' silence. Suspecting a trap on the narrow streets, he or- 
dered a retreat. The Jews rubbe d their eyes at the miracle. 
That the New City was still in Israeli hands was due to de- 
fault by the Arabs, no less than  the prowess of the Jews; and 
to what I firmly believe was divine intervention on scores of 
occasions. If the Arabs had seized  the initiative from the first 
day and captured the strategic buildings, the outcome would 
have been far different. The British contributed to the Arab 
fiasco. They thought that the Legion, boasting British gen- 
eralship and superior armor, would not only overrun the New 
City, but push onward to link up with other Arab forces in a 
giant pincer movement aimed at  Tel Aviv, ultimately pushing 
Israel into the sea. The determ ined resistance of the Kfar 
Etzion kibbutzim (controlling the road over which Egypt 
planned to bring reinforcements) was the first factor to upset 
the Arab timetable; then Jewis h initiative and the unexpected 
stand of Jerusalem, as well as Israeli successes elsewhere, 290 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
frustrated the Arab plan—as well as British intentions of re- 
entering Palestine via the back door on the heels of the Arab 
Legion. Mainly, however, the plan boomeranged because both 
Arab and British wholly underestimated the fighting prowess 
of what I've called the "new" Jew fighting for his homeland 
with back to the wall. 
I thought it quite symbolic for the Arabs to be cooped up 
inside the ancient walls while the Jews remained master of 
nearly everything modern outside those ramparts. But could 
the Jews continue to keep the Ar ab bottled up, in the face of 
slashing attacks and despite the prolongation of the siege? 
MY BREAK FOR FREEDOM 
I COULDN'T wait indefinitely for the answer. I had seen 
what I had come to see—the creation of Medinat Yisrael, its 
birth pangs, the Jews at work, living, fighting, dying. I was 
overwhelmingly impressed. The quality of heroism I met 
here was not always spectacular; it was often the quiet every- 
day fortitude that makes heroes of an entire people. 
Having seen and appraised, what was there for a restless 
(and famished) reporter to do now? To move on. To Jordan, 
Syria, Lebanon, to the places I had planned to see. By what 
route would one get there? Through the Arab lines. But how? 
All the correspondents were asking this question: they wanted 
to get on the Arab side to send out their stories. There were 
tantalizing rumors that the Jews had built a secret Toad to Tel 
Aviv over obscure mountain trails. Some of the Americans 
planned to get to Tel Aviv that  way. Others were waiting for 
something to happen. 
I decided I must attempt to go through no-man's land to 
the Arab side. This was the on ly way I could get into the 
Arab countries to the East. I turned for help to an Israeli of- 
ficial who had borrowed my c opy of Under Cover. He had A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 291 
liked it so much that he had said: "If I can aid you in any 
way, let me know." I could onl y reach him by telephoning an 
unlisted number and asking for "Walter." I had no idea who 
he was, actually, for most Jewish officials still maintained great 
secrecy about themselves. 
Despite the siege the intra-Jerusalem phone system func- 
tioned smoothly. Over the telephone Walter told me to meet 
him in the Jewish Agency Building. 
"I've had enough," I said bluntly, when I saw him. "I want 
your help in arranging with the Haganah to let me cross to 
the Arab side at night." 
Walter laughed out loud. "Why not ask for an introduction 
to the Mufti?" 
"That's just whom I'm going to  try to see," I explained. "I 
want to see how the Arabs are ta king the beating you've been 
giving them. I want to see if they're still so confident of vic- 
tory. I want to see if I can l earn just how much the British 
are backing them. And I ought to study the other Arab coun- 
tries before I leave the Middle East. Besides," I pleaded—for 
without Walter's help I'd cont inue to be stuck here—"the 
Old City Jews can't hold out. I want to be on the Arab side 
to cover the surrender." 
"You may never get there alive. There are snipers—" 
"Snipers can't shoot at night." 
"But mines blow up at night, and sentries can shoot with- 
out asking." 
"I must get going or go crazy!" 
"Phone me in a few days," Walter said. "I'll sec." 
I phoned him three times, and on the fourth try he asked 
me to meet an armored truck at a street corner. Soldiers of the 
Haganah would pick me up. 
"After that you're on your ow n. Have you made arrange- 
ments for your property in case you're , . . delayed?" Walter 
asked cheerfully. 
I met the truck as planned and was driven to Haganah head- 
quarters on Deir Aboutor. The dwellings hadn't suffered: it 292 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
had been a quick conquest. I was taken to the commander's 
room—bare, except for maps on the walls, and a desk on which 
a candle burned. The windows were bricked up. The com- 
mander was a Jew from Czechoslovakia. 
"Where are you going to cross over?" he asked, in English. 
''What route would you recommend?" I asked. 
He laughed. "We don't know of any. We don't make a 
practice of walking over." 
"I'd like your advice on a route I'm thinking of taking," I 
said. Together we went to a wall map. I ran my fingers along 
a deep narrow valley separating Deir Aboutor from a French 
convent on the other side, and l eading to Sylwan village, the 
new headquarters of the Arab military since their ousting from 
Osborne House. 
"I intend to hide on these slopes till night, then follow a 
footpath through the valley to  Sylwan village," I said. 
"You will also find some Arab houses just below us on the 
slopes of Deir Aboutor." 
"Are they deserted?" 
"They look deserted, but we assume the Arabs arc using 
them as outposts. At night you'll al so have to be careful of our 
own patrols," he warned: "Very careful. They prowl every- 
where." 
"I'll watch myself," I promised. "I'm ready. It will soon be 
dark." 
The commander turned me over to an assistant—a husky 
young sabra who spoke broken English. We waited until dusk 
and then my guide took me to the edge of the Jewish lines. 
Below us the land dipped sharply into the narrow valley that 
I hoped would afford me a temporary hiding-place. 
"Shalom," he said cheerfully. 
"Shalom," I replied, using the Hebrew word for peace, 
which is also the universal greeting among the Israelis. 
Lugging my bag, and wearing rubber-soled tennis shoes for 
silence, I scrambled down the steep sides of the hill, careful A Week of Agony: A Consul Is Murdered 293 
to keep out of view of any observers who might be in the 
Arab houses. 
Towering on the hill to my right, and surrounded by a wall, 
was the convent. I expected no danger from that quarter. After 
a few moments' walking, I hid myself in a clump of bushes, 
within several hundred yards of the houses. There I waited for 
darkness, in the meantime watching every bush, every shadow, 
listening to every vagrant sound. (CHAPTER XVI) 
"ESCAPE" TO THE ARABS 
Soon the snorers' chorus mixed with other weird 
noises in the room. The place became smelly, stuffy, 
heavy with the odors of perspiring bodies and un- 
washed feet. I began to itch, first around the neck, 
then my ankles, my legs, thighs, chest, armpits. A 
sleeping Arab rolled over and blew his hot breath 
against my face. . . . The heat and stench became 
more and more oppressive. What did I expect? I 
had forgotten the East during my sojourn in the 
West. 
OVER the convent wall the sky turned purple-pink, then 
purple, then gray, till finally all color disappeared, and dark- 
ness became one with the landscape. The thousand and one 
eyes that I imagined were watching had been swallowed by 
the blackness of night. Quickly I got up, shouldered my bag, 
and advanced another seventy-five yards or so, changing to the 
other side of the valley split by the footpath. I listened. Deir 
Aboutor was quiet with a dead silence. No light flickered from 
the Arab dwellings. They rose ag ainst the ridge blacker than 
the blackness around them. Every tree, every landmark was a 
grim sentry, watching me in silence. The night was filled with 
eyes, 
From the lower end of the valley—where I would have ex- 
pected the footpath to lead me—there now came the sound "Escape" to the Arabs 295 
of a dog barking. It meant that there was a farmhouse not far 
off, which I hadn't foreseen; and second, someone was either 
trying to enter or was skirting the area. Was it a patrol? A 
Jewish or Arab patrol? Was the farmhouse an Arab outpost? 
From a military point of view there should have been a ring 
of Arab lookouts beginning at a point a few hundred yards 
beyond my position. Another unpleasant thought: was the 
dog barking at me? Surely I was too far away to be detected. 
But was I? How far away was the dog? Night is a poor time 
to gauge distance. The barking stopped suddenly. I wondered 
if the wind had changed? After a nervous silence the barking 
began again. 
I slunk deeper into the darkness, and made sure nothing 
white showed. I had on a khaki shirt and army trousers. I was 
fortunate in that there was no moon. I could just distinguish 
between dark and darker, black and blacker. A chilling cold 
settled over the Judean hills, followed by a chill wind. 
I crossed again to the other side of the footpath, walking on 
the rough, stony ground and the tall grass where it was prob- 
ably free from mines. In the distance the cannonading con- 
tinued with a muffled sound, but near by even the swish of 
my legs against the grass was audible. I walked carefully, lift- 
ing my knees high and placing my feet down flat to minimize 
noise and scuffle. I stopped frequently, listening. 
What would I do if I bumped into a patrol, or if I were 
challenged either in Arabic or Hebrew? What would I say? 
I kept my eyes glued to the path, the only guide I had. It 
followed a serpentine course along the bottom of the valley, 
emerging into Sylwan village. I found myself directly below 
the last of the Arab dwellings. The path veered sharply to the 
right and disappeared toward the dim outlines of a mud brick 
house, a fanner's shack. Inside was a light. I heard the dog 
again, the same dog, warning its master. I watched the door. 
No door opened, though the dog kept howling. I kept bearing 
left now, following a course midway between the last of the 
Arab dwellings and the farmhouse. . . . 296 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Suddenly I stopped, and threw myself on the ground. Jut- 
ting from the slope—scarcely forty feet ahead of me—was a 
structure, built of flat stones in  the form of a rectangle, and 
obviously commanding the area below it. With panting heart 
I listened. The silence was deathly. Were they, too, listening 
behind the fortification? For at least a half hour I did not 
move, though briar thorns dug painfully into my left side. 
My luck could have been far worse: I could have fallen into 
the briars face down. I had heard nothing, seen no movement 
behind the stone barricade. Was the sentry asleep? 
Leaving my bag behind I crept toward the rockpile, feel- 
ing with my hands for more briar bushes—nature's devilish 
barbed wire. Ten feet from the little fort I listened with eyes 
closed, and waited. Heartened by the stillness, I crawled the 
remaining distance, and lifted myself up, my fingers creeping 
up the flat rocks, rock by rock , till they reached the rim. I was 
standing upright now, but the fortification was still above my 
head. The only thing now was to crawl along the base to in- 
vestigate through a side or rear entrance. Gumshoeing around 
right end, then up the slope, I lo oked into the parapet. It was 
a defense post, but it seemed deserted. I jumped softly inside 
and felt around for ammunition boxes. There were none. 
Picking up my pack, I resumed my walk, climbing steadily 
along the ridge. I came to the edge of a stone fence, and peered 
over the edge. In the yard were trees, and beyond them the 
dark outlines of what appeared to be a deserted house. 
Hurdling the fence, I found myself near a chicken coop, after 
which I followed the house wall and emerged at the front. A 
road came down from my left a nd disappeared in a curve at the 
right. I decided to follow it, reasoning that I was now on the 
outskirts of Arab headquarters in Sylwan village. 
Around a left bend I came upon a light—a candle placed 
in a niche in a corner wall of what seemed to be a house. On 
the other side of the lighted niche—but invisible because of 
the wall—there seemed to be a kitchen, because I heard the "Escape" to the Arabs 297 
scraping of a pot against the earth., and the crackling of wood. 
But why the lighted candle? Was it a signal? It flickered 
wildly as the night currents swept against it, but the stubborn 
wick remained lighted. I concluded that the Arab owner had 
placed it to help guide someone he expected. 
Walking around the wall, I saw an open door, and framed 
within it a frail old woman, her hands blackened with smoke, 
bent over a large caldron of steaming water. She wheeled 
around, startled, and screaming wildly, scooted inside. Dis- 
turbing the privacy of a woman may have grave complica- 
tions in the Moslem world. Patiently, like a man condemned 
without trial, I waited for the woman to return with her 
spouse, or a gun, or both. Instead she reappeared alone, a 
stout cane in her hand, and drove me out of her doorway. 
Thank God she was old and her husband was away! 
"Sylwan! Wein Sylwan? Where is Sylwan?" I kept asking. 
After I had cleared the door, and stood in the middle of the 
road, she pointed brusquely to the depths of the valley below. 
"Hunak Sylwan. There is Sylwan. Imshi! Imshi! Get out!" 
CONTACT WITH THE ARABS 
I DEBATED whether to hide somewhere till morning or risk 
encountering the Arabs at night. I reconnoitered. I was 
hemmed in by fences, walls, vegetation—a perfect setting for 
an ambush. I could have my throat slit before I could say 
"Hey." I walked swiftly down th e zigzag road. Just then I 
was challenged! 
The voice came somewhere out of the blackness, a thick, 
guttural Arabic. I had not the slightest idea what it was say- 
ing. I threw down my bag and immediately put up my hands. 
"Sadiq el Arab! Armani! Arab friend! Armenian!" 
The sentry yelled out again, more threateningly, still in 
Arabic. 298 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Ismae ya   akhi. Sadiq el Arab!" I called.  ''Listen, my 
brother. Arab friend!" I added in English: "I speak Armenian, 
English, Turkish, French, Spanish. I am Christian!" 
"You speak English?" the voice asked. "Who are you?" 
I was astounded to hear the excellent English. 
"I am Armenian. I have run away from the Jews. I am 
starved for food." 
"Do not move. I will come. Is anybody with you?" 
"I am alone. I have no gun." 
"Keep your hands up. If you try tricks I will shoot you." 
He spoke in Arabic to a companion. I saw the sentry's dim 
form emerge from the outlines of a roadblock that up to now 
I had not noticed. He stopped a few feet away and lit a 
match, bringing it quickly to my face. In the meanwhile he 
shouted to his companion. I saw the other sentry approach 
cautiously. While he covered me with a machine-gun, I was 
searched for weapons. 
"What do you have in the suitcase?" 
"My personal belongings. You may inspect them." 
"You can bring your hands dow n now," he said,  "and 
come with me." 
I walked alongside the English-speaking guard, while the 
other followed behind. Quickl y I passed my hand over my 
three medallions. It might prove dangerous to be caught with 
the mezuzah, but it was wound inseparably to the two others. 
"Do you know that no one is allowed to travel on these 
roads without written permission? When you didn't answer 
in Arabic we thought you were a Jew and almost shot you." 
"I am thankful to Allah that my hour hasn't yet come." 
The Arab was a native of Jerusalem, which explained his 
knowledge of English. Through devious side-roads he led me 
to a blacked-out house, and past a sentry. I found myself in a 
large room  with  a bed  in  one corner, and  several  Arabs 
sprawled out on mats. The man at the rough table who ad- 
dressed me in English was in civilian clothing. After display- 
ing all my credentials, this, substantially, was the story I told "Escape" to the Arabs 299 
him, and stuck to through all the subsequent interrogations: 
"I used to live in Deir Aboutor with the Egyptian and 
Syrian volunteers. Since I am an American citizen by accident 
—not by choice I assure you—I crossed to the Jewish side 
where the consulate and the other American journalists were 
located. For almost two weeks I have been starving. The Jews 
are desperate for food and water (which was no secret). I de- 
cided to run away at night by crossing through the Deir 
Aboutor quarter, which I knew extremely well. I eluded Jew- 
ish guards by going from house to house, yard to yard. They 
could not see me at night. I am well known to Captain 
Moustafa, Captain Zaki, and other Egyptian volunteers. They 
are all my friends." 
"You know Captain Zaki?" the Arab asked. He had turned 
sympathetic. 
"Very well. He will clear me immediately. And where is 
Captain Moustafa?" 
"I do not know him." 
"We will go see Captain Zaki," said the Arab, and together 
we plunged into the darkness outside. The road assumed a 
familiar aspect as we reached th e spot where the sentry had 
stopped me. The Arab, who was obviously an Intelligence 
officer, and I proceeded to climb the steep zigzagging road. 
Carrying my bag—whose weight by this time had become un- 
bearable, adding to my weakness induced by anxiety, fear, 
and insufficient food (in truth I hadn't had a sound meal in 
three days)—we reached the house with the candle still burn- 
ing in its niche. In feigned al arm, I turned to the Intelligence 
officer: 
"You are not taking me back to the Jewish lines? They will 
kill me!" 
"I am taking you to Captain Zaki. Why do you ask?" 
"Because I came down this road. I remember that candle 
distinctly. I spoke to the woman inside that house. . . ." 
The Arab wheeled around, and I knew that I had spoken out 
of turn. 300 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"You are lying. You did not come this way. It was impos- 
sible. . . ." 
Having made a blunder—though I didn't know just what— 
it was too late to retract. I repeated my story. "Come with 
me," he said coldly. We went to the doorway. The old woman 
was scouring in her kitchen. She came over and took a good 
look at me, then spoke excitedly with the words imshi, imshi 
thrown in. The Intelligence officer turned to me. 
"Exactly how did you come here? Tell the truth, or I will 
have you shot!" 
"I will take you part of the way if you wish. Follow 
me. ..." I pointed out the house with the chicken coop. 
"That is enough. I cannot go beyond here," the Arab said. 
"What is wrong in what I have said? I would not lie to 
you." 
"I cannot understand. This area is mined and patrolled 
constantly. Captain Zaki's headquarters are a hundred meters 
away. You are either a very lucky man, with Allah's blessing, 
or you are telling me a great lie. Come. . . ." 
We came to a darkened house, the candlelight visible 
through the shuttered windows. An Arab soldier challenged 
us, then led us to the door, and knocked. We walked in 
quickly. 
"Captain Zaki, Ismail, it's me, Artour! . . . Where is 
Moustafa?" 
The silence froze me from furt her demonstrations. Zaki, 
Ismail, and a dozen other Arabs, only one of whom I recog- 
nized as an Egyptian, were in the room, each heavily armed. 
"Why did you go with the Jews?" Zaki 3sked darkly. His 
dislike for me had obviously deepened into hatred. He was a 
changed man in other respects. He was now surly—seeking a 
scapegoat upon whom the blame could be placed for the dis- 
turbance of his comfort. 
I told Zaki how I had "escaped" from the Jews. "In more 
than a week I have not eaten a full meal," I said earnestly. "Escape" to the Arabs 301 
"You are very thin. You look bad. You look sick," he said 
comfortingly. 
Zaki and the Intelligence officer went into a comer. 
"Let's see what you have in your bag," the Egyptian said, 
returning. He inspected it, while the others looked on curi- 
ously. "You had another camera, a bigger one," Zaki ob- 
served. 
"The Jews took it away. They take everything away from 
the Christians." 
"You still have your wris t watch," he observed. 
"I kept it hidden in my pocket. I have worn it tonight for 
the first time since leaving the Arab side." Zaki had always had 
his eyes on my Gruen. He thought the metal band was solid 
gold. 
"Where are your new military shoes?" He astonished me 
with his memory. 
"I sold them to one of the American correspondents whose 
shoes were stolen by the Jews." I thought this an exceptionally 
convincing lie. 
The two conferred again, and the Intelligence officer said: 
"You will sleep here tonight. Tomorrow you must go up to 
El Raudat [Arab Legion headquart ers] to be questioned by 
the higher authorities." With this he left me alone in a room- 
ful of hostile Arabs. 
"Sleep there!" Zaki pointed to a mat squeezed between the 
worst of them. 
I feared that during the night they'd steal everything of 
value from my bag. I had my dollars and traveler's checks in 
a money belt around my waist. I tucked the watch inside my 
undershirt together with several fountain pens, feeling the 
metal against my body. Resting my head against my bag, I 
stretched out on the mat. I knew that by morning I'd have 
fleas or lice—or both. Just before retiring I saw one of the 
soldiers eating. I looked at him hungrily. Famed Arab hospi- 
tality won. The soldier offered me Arab bread, olives, and 302 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
halvah. I needed no persuasion. It felt good to take a mouth- 
ful of food without worrying about the next mouthful. The 
Arabs had plenty. They watched me eat, and eat, for fifteen 
minutes, in silence. Zaki had a mat in a corner, next to Ismail. 
He spoke only once. 
"The Armenians are not the friends of the Arab any more. 
We now call you Arman Khayen [treacherous Armenians] be- 
cause your Patriarch helped the Jews, He gave them food, 
water, and guns." 
I had eaten and rested a bit, and my strength had begun to 
return. "I am very sure that th at is a big lie which someone has 
told you and which you are repeating to me," I said boldly. I 
knew that Zaki was morally a coward who shrank from force. 
"Tomorrow, when we go to the Old City I will take you to 
my Patriarch, and you will hear from his lips that you are 
doing an injustice to the Armenians, who are the friends of 
the Arabs." 
"You are American, not an Armenian," Zaki sneered. 
"A child has no control when his parents leave a Moslem 
country like Turkey and take hi m to an accursed land like 
America for which, Allah is my witness, I bear no love. The 
choice was not mine, Captain Zaki." 
With this someone snuffed out the candle. Soon the 
snorers' chorus mixed with other weird noises in the room. 
The place became smelly, stuffy, heavy with the odors of per- 
spiring bodies and unwashed feet. I began to itch, first around 
the neck, then my ankles, my legs, thighs, chest, armpits. A 
sleeping Arab rolled over and blew his hot breath against my 
face. The Arab on the other side kicked my legs with his 
sandals, unconsciously, I am sure. The heat and stench be- 
came more and more oppressive. What did I expect? I had 
forgotten the East during my sojourn in the West. 
"Ma'alesh. Never mind. It's Allah's will." Anesthesized as 
well as exhausted, I sank into a sleep just after praying that the 
crucial morrow would see me safe, instead of a prisoner—or 
worse. "Escape" to the Arabs 303 
MAJOR ABDULLAH EL TEL 
I ROSE from the mat, my body aching in every joint from 
contact with the hard floor. I w as also scratching violently. Not 
a breath of fresh air had been allowed in during the night. I 
was almost reeling from the eff ects. I went to the door and 
breathed deeply. I purposely did not shave, in order to be 
more passable among my new companions. Zaki called me 
over gruffly: 
''Show me the route you took." 
I found the house with the chicken coop. "I jumped over 
this stone fence." Then I traced roughly my path of the pre- 
vious night. Zaki said nothing as we went back to headquarters 
and we started off at once for the Old City. I shouldered my 
bag and, with Zaki and Isma il on one side and two husky 
Arabs on the other, we trudged the hour's distance across the 
Biblical valleys of Hinnom, Kidron, and Jehoshaphat to the 
Old City. 
Traffic streamed in from Jericho as we entered from Ste- 
phen's Gate. I rubbed my eyes at the cans of gasoline lined up 
for sale, the quantities of food, lemonade, pushcart vendors, 
trucks and taxis, the mass of humanity seething inside and 
outside the gate. This contrasted violently with what I had 
seen only yesterday in the New City, where the only vehicles 
on the streets were army trucks; where people kept indoors 
and chewed thin slices of bread slowly to make them last 
longer. Zaki ordered one of the Arabs to seize my bag, ap- 
parently to discourage me from making a break. Through the 
long walk he had hardly spoken to me, nor had the others. I 
was treated as a pariah. I yearned for Moustafa's companion- 
ship, instead of this unholy company. We stopped in front of 
El Raudat. It was a beehive of milling, chattering, excited 
Arabs. 304 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Before we go in," Zaki said, "Lend me your watch. I have 
left mine at headquarters." 
I feared that if I parted with my watch I'd never see it again. 
But if I didn't surrender it, Zaki might turn in a nasty report. 
But I knew Zaki well. I snatched my bag from the Arab and 
glared at Zaki. "Take me to the Legion commander and make 
your report. If you lie, I have means of getting back at you. 
Yallah!" 
I led the way into the former police station. Inside, officers 
of the Arab Legion were all around. Compared to the hooli- 
gans I had been meeting, these were civilized men. Their 
khaffiya was not the white headdress worn by Palestinian 
Arabs, but a red-and-white checkerboard fabric which fell 
over their English khaki uniforms. I saw Zaki in earnest con- 
versation with a handsome youthful officer who glanced at me 
occasionally. The shield of the Hashemite Kingdom of Trans- 
Jordan—crossed Islamic swords, a crown, and the words: "The 
Arab Army," encircled by a wreath—was fastened to his 
khamya. The officer displayed no emotion as Zaki talked on 
lengthily. He merely nodded between an occasional question 
he put to him; then, finally, he motioned me to come over. 
In perfect English he said: 
"I am Major Abdullah el Tel, Commander of the Arab 
Legion in Jerusalem." 
"I have heard many fine things about you, Major," I said. 
"From the Jews?" 
"Certainly not! From the Armenians. We have been well 
impressed by the Arab Legion." As it turned out, I happened 
to strike the truth. 
The major said a few words in Arabic, to which Zaki made 
no answer. 
"Tell me about the Jews. What is their condition?" 
I gushed a theatrical confession of their difficult plight 
which, however, revealed nothing the Arabs did not already 
know. 
"We know very well they are desperate for food and water. "Escape" to the Arabs 305 
But how long can they hold out? What are their reserves of 
food and ammunition?" 
I replied honestly that I did not know, for these were 
among the closest-guarded secrets of the New City. 
"How were you able to escape from the Jewish guards at 
Deir Aboutor?" the Legion commander asked. 
I recited how I had done it, adding: "You won't believe 
me when I say this, Major, but I met very few guards. The 
Jews seem to be very short of manpower." 
"I cannot believe that. They attack with great force." 
"Unless they are hiding their men, Major, I swear to you I 
saw very few of them." I was sure I could not convince him 
with the truth. 
"What has been the effect of our shelling?" 
"It has had a devastating effect on the houses and business 
areas, and is keeping the Jews o ff the streets. They dread the 
shelling. But the effect on the morale is mixed. Some are dis- 
couraged. Others are not. It will take a long time to crush 
Jewish morale completely." 
"Then you think they are not ready to surrender?" 
"No. They would rather die fighting than surrender." 
"Our shells will batter them until they surrender—just as 
the Jews in the Jewish quarter must surrender in the next few 
days. Why don't you stay and report the news?" the major 
asked suddenly. 
"I had intended to leave Jerusalem immediately," I said, 
"but since you graciously invite me, I will be happy to stay. 
Major, I have heard the Arabs say unpleasant things about my 
people. Is this true?" 
"I have already spoken over the radio and stated that the 
rumors against your people are false. I've warned that those 
who continue to whisper these lies will be punished. I am 
trusting you, an Armenian. Is that not sufficient answer?" 
I looked at Captain Zaki, who was slumped in his seat. He 
would not meet my eyes, and soon left the room. The major 
wrote out a slip, authorizing my stay, then turned to other 306 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
duties. I was left to my own resources. It was unbusinesslike 
and unmilitary, but it was the Arab way of doing things. 
As I left Major Tel's office, I came upon Nassib Boulos, the 
string correspondent for Life magazine, whom I had pre- 
viously met at the Public Information Office. 
"What are you doing here? I thought you were with the 
Jews." 
I tried to avoid answering, but he grabbed my arm. "When 
did you come here?" 
"An hour ago. I have already seen Major Tel and he asked 
me to stay." 
"I shall talk to him . . . and to you, later," Boulos said in 
a threatening voice. 
Since Major Tel wanted me to report the news—and ob- 
viously had in mind the imminent surrender of the Jews in 
the Old City—I knew that I would remain unmolested at 
least until then. I put Boulos out of my mind. At the moment 
I was eager to learn what had happened to the Armenian 
compound in the bitter fighting for the Old City which I'd 
seen from the Pantiles roof. I hastened toward the Vank, 
walking up Via Dolorosa and past restaurants that made my 
mouth drool. I stuffed myself with a brunch of fried eggs, 
salad, cheese, jam, bread, coffee; at another shop I had two 
helpings of two kinds of pastry, more coffee and a whole 
pitcher of water. Thus fortified, I demanded to see the Patri- 
arch. But military bureaucracy had set in. An Arab Legion 
soldier and a half dozen Armenian guards stopped me at the 
entrance. When I was finally us hered into the presence of the 
Patriarch, I found him a changed man. (CHAPTER X V I I )  
ARABS, ARMENIANS, CATHOLICS 
I looked up to heaven. "What sin have these people 
committed against Thee?" I asked. "What wrongs 
have my people done to deserve the millions mas- 
sacred and maimed since they embraced Christi- 
anity? Are not these chapels and cathedrals and the 
daily Masses and offerings of prayer sufficient proof 
of their faith in Thee and Thy works? . . . Why, 
then, do You oppress them thus?" 
THE war had taken much out of the Patriarch since I had 
seen him that last frantic day of the Mandate. His beard had 
whitened during my absence. He appeared thinner, and was 
haggard—his usually plump chee ks drawn tighter against the 
cheek bones, his eyes weary, though still ablaze with un- 
quenchable vitality. 
His people had all gathered around him like frightened 
children around their father. There were the Armenians who 
fled in panic from the New City leaving their property to be 
looted and appropriated by the Jews; Armenians from quar- 
ters adjoining the Jewish section of the Old City, whose 
homes had long ago been picked clean by the Arabs; Ar- 
menians from near-by villages, in fear of their lives; the old 
and tottering who could remember the massacres of Sultan 
Hamid, the Damned; the young and vigorous, the soldier, the 308 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
artisan, the agnostic; all these had gathered—3,800 souls— 
within the inclosure of the monastery, under the protection 
of the Mother Church. It was always thus in Armenian his- 
tory. When split by partisanship within, or endangered by 
enemies outside, the Church assumed charge of her flock in its 
hour of need, brought them through safely, then released them 
until the next crisis. 
This monastery, this Vank, was medieval in structure, but 
not in spirit. This "religious city" inside the Old City walls 
was surrounded by its own ramparts, ten or more feet thick 
at their base; its fortresslike homes, built of enduring stone, 
had tiny windows cross-barred with  inch-thick iron grillwork. 
No one could hurdle walls thirty to fifty feet high. The only 
entrance—and exit—was through one historic door, set in 
massive hinges, locked and unlocked with a black iron key 
eight inches long and kept alwa ys by the Patriarch. The door 
itself was of solid iron many inch es thick, so that rifle bullets 
bounced off like ping-pong balls. I could understand why the 
Arab hoodlums had been unable to gain entrance. Immedi- 
ately upon entering a dark, cavernous courtyard, one read a 
plaque in Arabic and in Armenian denouncing as "damned 
and a son of the damned, and upon him fall the damnation 
of God, the All High" anyone who sought to harm the sanc- 
tuary. 
THE MAJOR AND THE PATRIARCH 
THE Arab gangs were no longer a threat because a section of 
the Vank compound—the school—was now occupied by the 
Arab Legion which had made it their headquarters. After a 
few words, I asked the Patriarch about the Legion. 
"I have no quarrel with it," he told me. "It arrived just in 
time. I could no longer hold off the Arab irregulars who looted 
the Armenian homes outside the Vank, and wanted to do the Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 309 
same here under the guise of defending us. The Legion de- 
manded the use of our Tarkmanchatz [School of the Holy 
Translators] as headquarters. Their soldiers do not molest us." 
Just then it was announced that Major Abdullah el Tel had 
arrived unexpectedly and was waiting for an audience. My 
heart sank. How had the major traced me here? Was it the 
work of Zaki, or, more probably, of Nassib Boulos who—by 
this time—may have discovered me as the author of Under 
Cover1 and characterized my expose of Nazis and bigots as 
pro-Jewish pleading. I arose to go; I did not want to involve 
the Patriarch in any quarrel the major might pick with me. 
The Patriarch, however, urged me to stay, and the Legion 
commander strode in briskly, shook hands, and greeted me 
with a smile. Oriental candy a nd lemonade were brought im- 
mediately, followed by demi-tasse. 
The two talked informally. Th e major had come to hear 
the Patriarch's report of the behavior of the Arab Legion, 
and to reassure him that chur ch property would remain un- 
harmed. He urged the Patriarch to report immediately any 
violation of the rules laid down for the Arab Legion. The 
conversation turned to the Jews in the Old City: 
"We have pushed them back to a very narrow area. They 
will have to surrender in a day or two. Everyone tells me that 
my terms of surrender are too easy. The people want revenge. 
They would like to massacre them all if I let them. They have 
not forgotten Deir Yassin. . . . But why be like the Jews?" 
The Patriarch commended him for his humanitarianism, 
and with this the major left. Th e Prelate then turned to me: 
"We are indeed fortunate to have an understanding com- 
mander who at the same time loves the Armenians." 
"What do you think of the Arabs?" I asked the Patriarch. 
He seemed startled at my s udden query. I knew he avoided 
controversial questions, but I th ought I had chosen the proper 
psychological moment to pose the question. 
1 When I showed a copy of it to an Armenian, he said: "If the Arabs 
learn that you wrote this book, they'll hang you from the nearest arch," 310 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"We have always gotten along well with them. When 1,200 
of our Armenians decided to go to Armenia they begged them 
to stay. They are a friendly and hospitable people, and quite 
emotional. As to their national faults, they are divided into 
fellaheen and effendi classes. The line of demarcation is sharp. 
They have no caste system, but there are castes. They lack 
discipline. The fellaheen are a huge mass of sweating human 
beings who exist to work for the effendi. The fellaheen move 
blindly and fanatically, and are kept ignorant and illiterate. 
They have no sense of nationality or patriotism except when 
incited. The leadership comes exclusively from within a small 
circle in the effendi class." 
The Patriarch then stopped his observations, changed the 
subject, and brought the interview to an end. 
LIFE IN THE BESIEGED VANK 
I WENT among my people. Within the area of a few acres 
built to house one thousand pilgri ms lived nearly four thou- 
sand Armenians. They were in tiny cell-like rooms, in hall- 
ways, alleys, beneath damp arch ways, in tents and makeshift 
shacks built in the stone corridors. The balcony of St. James 
Cathedral housed fourteen families, and a curtain was drawn 
over the balcony railing when High Mass was celebrated. I 
was struck by the cleanliness of  the Armenian women, who 
seemed to be always at their tubs, elbows deep in suds. 
Here, under a canopy in a draughty corridor, a cobbler had 
set up shop; there, a tailor w as engaged in cutting away the 
worn-out portions of a father's  trousers and making shorts for 
the son. The women were busily  knitting, sewing, darning. 
And children! There were hundreds of friendly, plump- 
cheeked, tousle-haired boys and girls with large brown eyes, 
clear skins, as mischievous as any American child. Dressed in 
patched-up clothing made over from their elders' cast-offs, Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 311 
they were playing marbles with discarded rifle shells. Their 
shoes and woolen socks were homemade. Their toys were 
handed down from an older brother or sister. They darted 
around the soldiers and through the maze of streets with the 
agility of rabbits. But shrapnel had caught many; scores of 
them would carry lifelong scars. 
Water, a precious item in the New City, was plentiful in 
the Vank wells and storage cisterns, but rationed strictly. 
Daily the refugees queued up in the central courtyard before 
the main well. They received one loaf of bread a day, plus one 
hot meal, which was usually stew or thick soup with vege- 
tables, herbs, and meat thrown in. 
I found the largest concentration of refugees in a vast, 
cavernous warehouse, whose arched roof and walls were the 
thickness of a dam foundation, and invulnerable to attack of 
any kind. The floor was of damp, dark earth, and on it the 
families had spread their rugs , blankets, and cooking pots. 
Charcoal braziers took some of the chill away. The old folk 
were lying down, the others were huddled in groups. At the 
one end—from which came the only light—was the first-aid 
station and "hospital," with a Dr. Semerjian in charge. Op- 
posite, at the base of a wall overrun with mold, were seven 
mounds covered by mats. Refugee families rested about them, 
"What are these mounds?" I asked. 
"Graves. The graves of those who have died since the 15th 
of May." 
"Do these people know the dead are buried in their midst?" 
"How can one keep them ignorant of it?" 
"But how can one sleep in the same room with the dead?" 
Dr. Semerjian said: "It is better for the living to lie on the 
ground above the dead than to join them. Anang tche, pare- 
gam? Is it not so, friend? Besides, there is no choice. Our 
cemetery is under constant sniping." 
One of the nurses spoke up. "Three days ago a fourteen- 
year-old boy died. He lies under that second mound. His 
mother slept within ten feet of his body, and did not know 312 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
until today that her son was dead or that she had been sleep- 
ing next to his grave for three nights." 
Dr. Semerjian and his colleague, Dr. Daghlian, had worked 
as technicians in the Mandate government's Health Depart- 
ment. They removed shrapnel and bullets by old-fashioned 
but effective methods, stemmed the flow of blood and treated 
for shock. "Doctor" was merely a title of gratitude. So far they 
had treated more than two hundred. All of Jerusalem's physi- 
cians had fled long before, leaving the Old City at the mercy 
of midwives, ignorant practiti oners, and quacks. Despite the 
pleas of Trans-Jordan officials, not one Arab physician returned 
during the hectic days of Jerusalem's siege (in contrast with 
Israeli doctors, who begged to be allowed to remain). With 
some foresight the Armenians had laid away a supply of 
medicine and bandages, the latter washed again and again and 
used indefinitely as new patients replaced the old. 
All told, twenty-seven Arme nians were killed during the 
siege. The Jews in the New City  knew, of course, that the 
Arab Legion was using the school. In retaliating, they caused 
no damage to the Arabs but only to the Armenians and their 
property. During the break through Zion Gate, and there- 
after when the Jews lobbed over their "Davidka" bombs, one 
such bomb alone injured forty and killed two when it landed 
in the quarters of the priests, whose yard was being used as a 
playground. Three more of the "Davidkas" had struck the 
roof of the monastery but fortunately proved to be duds. 
I thanked God that these remnants of my people had sur- 
vived the immediate crisis. Suffering everywhere fosters a kin- 
ship, but even more so when th e sufferers are your people. I 
was discovering them. 
Through centuries of suffering and privation they had built 
a tenacity to cling to life which, like that of the Jews, was al- 
together extraordinary. There was Mariam Doudou (Miriam, 
the Aged One), who was a symbol. She was a bent little 
woman, so old that she was ageless, a refugee from the first Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 313 
World War during which her husband and four children 
were massacred by the Turks. She always wore black, even a 
black apron and black shawl, in perpetual mourning. Her eyes 
were sunk deep, and though her face was the color of parch- 
ment, it was plump and babies liked to pinch it. She went 
about daily cleaning, washing, drawing water from the well, 
baby-sitting with scores of diffe rent toddlers who called her 
mayrig—mother. She went to church twice daily—though she 
really had no need to do so because there was no evil in her— 
but she prayed with her gnarled hands and asked forgiveness 
for sins she never committed. 
THE "FATHER COUGHLIN" OF JERUSALEM 
A FEW blocks away a certain Latin priest also prayed, and 
wished in his heart that Mariam Doudou and other "dis- 
sidents" would forsake their "false" church and join the one 
and only true faith in the world. The story behind this priest, 
who served as Jerusalem's counterpart of Father Coughlin 
during the siege, is an episode of appalling treachery aimed at 
the destruction of the Armenian monastery. 
He exploited the differences that have existed between the 
Latin Church and the smaller Eastern Orthodox Churches, 
dating back to the schism at the Council of Chalcedon, in A.D. 
451. This developed when the Church of Rome, then a mem- 
ber of the one Catholic Church (used in the universal, not 
the Roman sense) took issue with the leadership of the five 
different patriarchs then jointly ruling the entire Christian 
Church. The differences were mainly on questions of dogma. 
The Roman Church withdrew, setting up a Western Church, 
while the Eastern Churches (Greek, Armenian, Coptic, and 
Syrian) adhered to the beliefs th ey retain to this day. The 
Roman pontiffs, considering the others "dissidents"—when, 314 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
as a matter of history, Rome itself caused the dissension in 
Christian unity—have since lived in the hope of inducing the 
Armenian Church, as well as the other Churches adhering to 
the doctrines of the non-Roman Catholic Church, to join the 
Roman fold.2 
In Jerusalem the relationship was further strained by the 
fact that the Armenians shared  the custodianship, on a basis 
of equality with the Latin Ca tholics and Greeks, of the 
Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Shrine of the Ascen- 
sion, together with the rights and responsibilities of other holy 
places in Jerusalem and elsewhere in the Holy Land. The re- 
ligious rivalry among these three main custodians has always 
been intense, the Latin Chur ch unfortunately maintaining 
that the custodianship should be hers exclusively. 
No newcomers to the Holy City, the Armenians have had a 
history of more than 1,300 years, and from the seventh cen- 
tury continuously maintained re ligious establishments of con- 
siderable importance in Jerusalem and Bethlehem. 
Against this background, the Latin priest stepped into the 
arena, determined to discredit the Armenians and thus de- 
stroy once and for all their claim to secular and religious rights 
in the Holy City. He called t ogether some of Jerusalem's 
choicest Arab cutthroats, and cr aftily incited them with the 
fabrication that the "Orthodox Communists" (the Arme- 
nians) were secretly helping Jews with arms, food, and water 
through a tunnel dug from the Armenian quarter to the Jew- 
ish quarter. Further, the "Armenian microbes of St. James 
Monastery" were giving to Jews refuge inside the Vank. A 
2 The Pope's missionary efforts have generally fallen on barren ground, 
and only a small percentage of the Ar menian people subscribe to the Roman 
faith. A somewhat larger percentage be long to various Protestant denomina- 
tions, owing to the initial efforts of mi ssionaries of the Foreign Mission Boards 
who proselyted in Turkey before World War I. 
At least 85% of Armenians, however, cling to the Mother Church— 
National, Apostolic, Orthodox, Independe nt—for spiritual and moral suste- 
nance. Armenia is the oldest Christia n State. It adopted Christianity in A.D. 
301, some 20 years before Christianity became the State religion of the Roman 
empire . Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 315 
handful of Palestinian pounds entrusted to the hoodlums' 
leader did the rest. 
"Annan Khsyen! Treacherous Armenians!" 
The cry spread from lip to lip, as the hate-crazed fanatics 
rushed out to liberate the Va nk from "Armenians helping the 
Zionist Jews against the Arab."  They crashed against the 
massive door, but neither threats nor gunfire could open it, for 
the iron key was with the Patriarch. Expecting to catch the 
Armenians by surprise, they tried again later, and the next day 
they were back again. This time the Patriarch allowed a few 
to enter on the plea that they wanted to take positions against 
the Jews. When the rest sought admittance they were barred, 
and the neutrality of the Vank preserved. The Arabs fired 
again and again at the door, as the vicious cry "Arman 
Khayen!" sounded through the illiterate, superstitions, and 
loot-inflamed Arab mobs. 
No American can understand the sinister threat implicit in 
those words. Upon an ignorant mob the effect is tantamount 
to the cry of "Ritual Murder" leveled against the Jews in the 
pogroms of Czarist Russia. Hundreds might easily have been 
slaughtered in the Vank had the Arab fanatics forced their 
way in. The Armenians were defenseless; completely at the 
mercy of the aggressors, Jewish and Arab. They were in the 
direct line of fire, and dared not fight back lest they violate 
their neutrality. Only the Patriarch's leadership prevented 
imminent disaster to the Vank's refugees, many of whom re- 
membered with a shudder the consequences of "Arman 
Khayen!" in Turkey. 
The Arab gangs had resorted to another device. On Sun- 
day, May 16, the day after the Mandate ended, as High Mass 
was being celebrated in the Cathedral of St. James, a terrific 
explosion on a narrow road leading to the Vank shook its 
foundations, shattering windows and throwing the refugees 
into panic. Nothing like it had ever been heard inside the 
Holy City. Three Arabs were blown to death. Taking advan- 
tage of the Sabbath, they were carrying the mine to blow off 316 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the iron gate when they got in to an argument, and the fuse 
went off. The Armenians construed this as a miracle of divine 
intervention, and rendered special prayers. 
Frustrated, the hoodlum leader now turned to still another 
plan. From a large enclosure at the rear of his home not far 
from the monastery he set up mortar artillery and pounded 
the Vank with two and three-inch shells. The casualties were 
many, particularly among the children. 
THE THREE "STONES ON HIS HEART . . ." 
THERE were three stones on the Patriarch's heart. The 
vengeful Latin priest was the first stone. The second stone, 
equally heavy, was the renegade  elements of his own people— 
organized, politically opportunist Armenian hooligans who 
had collaborated with Arab rabble under orders of the Mufti's 
Arab Higher Committee. 
While the Mandate was still in force and hopes of an Arab 
victory ran high, the Armenian ruffians placed the Vank in 
dire jeopardy. They began by promising the Mufti's hench- 
men access to the monastery, in orde r to be able to fire on the 
Jewish quarter. The Patriarch dreaded most the thought of 
placing the Vank between two fires, making it a battleground. 
At one time a delegation calle d upon him and demanded that 
it and the Mufti's Arab followers be permitted to enter, or 
else. . . . The Patriarch threatened to throw them out bodily, 
whereupon one of the Armenian thugs placed a hand on his 
gun holster. Eyewitnesses told me that the enraged Patriarch 
roared: 
"Mertzourzek! Kill me! If you do,  you and your men will be 
torn limb from limb before you reach the door!" 
At this the Armenians backed out . They returned later, dis- 
guised as Arabs, and joined the gangs instigated by the Latin 
priest in storming the Vank door. One of the Armenian rene- Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 317 
gades harbored two British deserters in his home and led them 
to mine another entrance to th e Vank, hoping to force their 
way in. Others joined the Arabs in spreading the lie that the 
Kaghakatzis—the native-bom Arme nian Jerusalemites, historic 
defenders of the Vank—were "A rman Khrayen," in order to 
force the Patriarch to open the monastery door. But the 
Patriarch held the great iron key as if it were the key to 
heaven. 
Still another stone, a third, was on the Patriarch's heart. 
This one was Jewish, and added its weight to the Catholic 
and Armenian. 
At sunset on May 13 the British, who had been guarding 
the Greek Monastery of St, Georges, which bordered on the 
Jewish and Armenian quarters, left the Old City without 
warning. The alert Haganah de fenders immediately began to 
occupy the Armenian areas, to  the great alarm of the Ar- 
menians. If this news reached the Arabs they would think the 
Armenians had allowed the Jews to enter. The renegade 
hordes, waiting for just such an excuse, would attack both 
Jews and Armenians, and the Vank would indeed become a 
bloody battleground. 
As an immediate precaution against Arab attack, all the Ar- 
menian families were evacuated to the monastery. But no 
Arabs came. By midnight the Jews had occupied more than 
half of the deserted quarter. The Arabs meanwhile were still 
asleep to the fact that the Jews were consolidating their posi- 
tion. The Patriarch decided to act. He dispatched two priests 
to the Jews, saying: "Tell the Jews that they must leave at 
once. Try to make them understand that if they do not want 
to be attacked, they must withdraw immediately from our 
quarter. If they refuse, report back to me immediately." 
Stealthily, through the barricaded  street separating the two 
quarters, as the story was told me, the black-robed priests 
crossed to the Jewish side. Happily the Arabs were snoring in 
their beds. Had a single Arab seen Armenians crossing into the 
Jewish sector, five thousand hoodlums would have rushed to 318 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the scene and the massacre and looting of Armenians in the 
monastery would have begun with the first light of dawn. 
The Haganah escorted the Armenian priests to the home of 
Mordachi Weingarten, mukhtar, mayor, of the Jewish quarter 
of the Old City. They returned within the hour: Weingarten 
had refused! The priests had gained the impression, in fact, 
that he intended to occupy all the key positions by morning. 
The Patriarch immediately sent the priests back with orders 
to return with Weingarten hi mself—or not return at all! 
"Tell him that I will order an attack immediately if he does 
not come at once." 
It was a magnificent bluff! For although the Armenians had 
some small arms and a few small homemade machine guns, 
they were no match for the veteran Jewish fighters who had 
already defied—and so far held at bay—the Arab hordes. 
While his emissaries were gone, the Patriarch turned to 
psychological warfare. He orde red his lieutenant to round up 
scores of Armenian men—the tougher in appearance, the bet- 
ter—and post them along the twisted passageways down 
which he expected Weingarten to come for the interview. 
"Make sure they look heavily armed," he ordered. 
As it happened, Weingarten decided to come, and it prob- 
ably surprised him no less than the returning priests to see 
pistols and machine-guns bristling from every corner, balcony, 
and stairway, and scores of armed men prowling about men- 
acingly. Once he entered the vast reception-room of the 
Patriarch, Weingarten was honored with the pomp of which 
only the Orient is capable. The door was closed, and the two, 
who were personal friends, were  left alone. It is not known 
what occurred between them—what appeals, threats, en- 
treaties, or other tactics were used on the shrewd mukhtar by 
the equally shrewd Patriarch. The Jew and the Armenian bat- 
tled it out all night, each the zealous shepherd of his people. 
The Armenian won. Whatever the Patriarch's technique, 
his achievement—unheralded, and kept secret to this hour— 
was one of the diplomatic strokes of the Arab-Israel war. Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 319 
When Weingarten finally left, it was only an hour before 
daybreak of the 14th, the last day of the British mandate. Back 
through the cobblestone alleys  bristling with armed men, 
through the blockaded streets, and into the Jewish quarter 
went Mordachi Weingarten. He called a council of his elders 
and Haganah commanders. 
"The Armenians are not Arabs," he told them. "They will 
fight fiercely. I have seen that they are well armed and have 
many men. If we fight them we  will dissipate our strength and 
weaken ourselves against the Arabs. We arc not strong enough 
to fight on two fronts." This was hard military common sense. 
"Our quarrel is not with the Armenians. To their peril, they 
have refused to allow the Arabs to take positions in their 
monastery against us. Let us not fight our friends, but the 
Arab enemy who would massacre us if he could." 
And so, while the whole of Jerusalem, save for a handful of 
Armenians, slept, the Jews wit hdrew from the Armenian sec- 
tor they had occupied. From the deserted homes they took 
with them all the food they c ould find. It was a windfall that 
helped them carry on for another two weeks. 
No one could have foreseen the consequences had the 
Patriarch failed and the Jews occupied the Armenian quarter, 
thus placing them in control of roughly one third of the popu- 
lated area of the Old City. It may be argued that this lone 
Armenian helped save the Old City from strife that surely 
would have enveloped it, conve rting many of the holy places 
into battlegrounds. 
Standing at the edge of Vank Square, I took a final look at 
my people, at old and battered folk gathered at the well for 
their water rations, at the children, at the ripped walls and 
damaged belfry of the Cathedral of St. James where a "Da- 
vidka" had crashed, at the house shattered by the Arab hood- 
lum's mortars. I saw little Anna Kouyoumjian tugging at 
Akabi, her tiny sister whose ar m, struck by shrapnel, was 
wrapped in washed-over bandages. I had met their father, 320 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Garabed, whose parents were murdered by the Turks and who 
had been brought up in the American Orphanage at Konya, 
He was a mechanic before the war. Now he eked out a living 
by peddling paraffin products, and working as water-carrier. 
He had to support a family of three boys, three girls, a wife, 
and an old aunt. He averaged fifty cents a day. 
I wept at the plight of my refugee people. Refugees a hun- 
dred years ago, thirty years ago, and again today; buffeted by 
wars not of their making, living in terror in lands not of their 
choosing, victims of a score of bloody Jehads against the Chris- 
tians—homeless wanderers over blighted lands of the feudal 
Middle East. 
Martyrdom for them, as for the Jews, was no new experi- 
ence. A classic instance is  recorded of the year A.D. 451, when 
some 66,000 Armenians, under St. Vartan, faced an invading 
army of 220,000 Persians rather than convert to Zoroastrianism. 
They were crushed but their faith remained intact, and thirty 
years later they were granted religious freedom. Before the 
battle Armenian bishops spur ned the Persian demands for 
conversion in these words: 
From this belief [Christianity] no one can move us, neither 
angels nor men—neither fire nor  sword, nor water, nor any 
other horrid tortures, however they be called. All our goods 
and possessions are before thee—di spose of them as thou wilt; 
and if thou only leavest us to our belief, we will, here below, 
choose no other lord in thy place,  and in heaven have no other 
God than Jesus Christ, for there is no other God save only 
Him. 
But, shouldst thou require some thing beyond this great tes- 
timony, behold our resolution: our bodies are in thy hands— 
do with them according to thy plea sure; tortures are thine, and 
patience ours; thou hast the sword, we the neck; we are noth- 
ing better than our forefathers, who, for the sake of their faith, 
resigned their goods, possessions, and life. . . . Arabs, Armenians, Catholics 321 
Do thou, therefore, enquire of us no further concerning 
these things, for our belief originates not with man. We are 
not taught like children; but we are indissolubly bound to 
God, from whom nothing can detach us, neither now, nor 
hereafter, nor for ever, nor for ever and ever. 
I looked up to heaven. "What sin have these people com- 
mitted against Thee?" I asked. "What wrongs have they done 
to deserve the millions massacred  and maimed since they em- 
braced Christianity? Are not th ese chapels and cathedrals and 
the daily Masses and offerings of  prayer sufficient proof of 
their faith in Thee and Thy works? Did not the Patriarch 
rescue this Holy City from the carnage of war but only a few 
days ago? Why, then, do You oppress them thus?" 
I looked at the courtyard again, and no longer saw the 
maimed, old Mariam Doudou, or  Garabed weighed down as a 
water-carrier. I saw the children: the pumpkin-round faces of 
little boys with the large brown eyes, the chubby faces of little 
Anna and Akabi, and their pigt ails. The pink rags with which 
their hair was tied looked radiant, and their tattered garments 
made of a dozen different pa tches looked regal. I walked 
among the youngsters, pulling at the long, tousled hair, the 
pigtails. They squealed and screamed and pounced on my 
camera. "Line up for a picture," I said, and two score of them 
climbed on the grillwork of the sealed well and stood as still 
as a litter of puppies; 
"There must be a God," I assured myself. "These are His 
children. He has saved them from the carnage of war yester- 
day and today, and He will preserve them for tomorrow. Per- 
haps these children will see a better world, a kindlier world, 
one of peace and plenty, and of universal brotherhood." 
I took leave of the place: walked  past the Cathedral, through 
the tunnel-like entrance hall into Vank Square, and finally 
found myself before the headquarters of the Arab Legion, the 322 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Armenian school, on the edge of the battle zone. The entrance 
was protected with sandbags. Le gion soldiers were scurrying 
everywhere. A totally new and unforgettable experience 
awaited me: the Calvary of the Jews in the ancient walled 
city of Jerusalem. (CHAPTER X V I I I )  
THE LAST EXODUS 
A rifle shot has just rung out! Its effect is electrify- 
ing. Half the mob of refugees surges toward Zion 
Gate, trampling those in fr ont. The other half, in a 
wild stampede, tries to run the other way, back to 
the ghetto whose safety they had just left. . . . 
Officers are rushing amon g their men, shouting 
orders. They block the mob from fleeing back to the 
ghetto. . . . God, am I going to witness a massacre? 
VICTORS and vultures hovered around the periphery of the 
Jewish Old City, now being batte red mercilessly by the Arab 
Legion. Abdullah el Tel had promised a merciful surrender, 
but he was savage in bringing it about. There was no way to 
"peace" except through war becau se the Jews refused to sur- 
render. The Legion guns were firing point-blank at targets 
from fifty to two hundred yards away. I got as close as I dared. 
As each building was battered, and the defenders pushed back, 
sappers would advance and blow the works. House by house 
the Jews were being pushed into the heart of their ghetto. 
This had been going on day a nd night and was now in its 
tenth day. 
There certainly were enough Arabs—hundreds of Arab Le- 
gion soldiers milling around in British khaki and khaffiyas. 
They were uniformly young and looked like a genuine fighting 324 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
army. They were all heavily armed, and ammunition was be- 
ing brought up constantly in boxes with English markings. 
There was shortage neither of men nor armaments. 
I got permission from a junior officer to visit the defenses 
on Zion Gate. One of the massive  portals hung crazily from 
one set of hinges, the other was blown off. The passageway, 
about twenty feet wide and thirty feet high, was now packed 
tight with barbed wire, rails, and rocks. Above it the walls 
were manned heavily by Legion troops. Here, also, I found a 
concentration of several dozen British deserters, fighting with 
the Arabs. Immediately beside the Gate three heavy British 
armored cars lay in waiting for the Palmach. The Jews would 
certainly get a scorching reception if they tried another break- 
through. 
I walked back to the monastery grounds, to the School of 
the Holy Translators. The windowpanes were broken and the 
rooms filthy. Swarms of fl ies buzzed around. Swishing my 
way through them, I walked to the rear. Sitting in a classroom 
chair behind a desk was the commander of the Zion Gate 
Front, Captain Mahmoud Bey Mousa, soft-spoken and schol- 
arly-looking, swathed in layers of an oversized khaffiya that 
covered his face except for eyes and mouth. I assumed this 
was his protection against the flies. Through an interpreter I 
reported my name and professi on, and asked his permission 
to stay for the surrender. 
"I think the negotiations will begin tomorrow morning," 
Mahmoud Bey said. 
He was sitting literally on the proverbial keg of gunpowder, 
for stacked behind and all around him, under his bed near by, 
and all the way to the farther end of the basement, which was 
being used as an emergency ho spital, were cases upon cases of 
ammunition with the usual markings of His Majesty's Army. 
I squeezed my bag between cases of ammunition under his 
bed, and then went to the top floor of the school to take 
photographs of the Jewish quarter. They were to prove of The Last Exodus 325 
historic value, for less than forty-eight hours later the ghetto 
was reduced to ruin and rubble. 
Now came the newshounds: two American correspondents 
—Dan de Luce of the Associated Press, and a photographer 
from Life. The rest were Arab and English, including two 
perfumed dandies in flimsy silk shirts, colored scarves, and 
trousers like loose-flowing skirts. It seemed odd to see them 
among the rough soldiers, the artillery, the squalor of war. 
Arab homosexuals are not usua lly obviously effeminate in 
manner. The boys and the two dandies asked a lot of ques- 
tions, sniffed all over the place, then went off to supper. De 
Luce returned just before the Va nk door closed for the night. 
I had supper with the Arab Legion—the usual bread with 
cheese, olives, and halvah, follow ed by the usual flies swarm- 
ing around the crumbs in black clouds. 
THE SURRENDER 
THERE was no peace in the School of the Holy Translators 
that night. From the upper stories a withering fire poured 
down on the ghetto, while from below, the bigger guns barked 
at point-blank range. Building after building crumbled with 
roars and the clattering of st one over stone. The school shook 
from the violence of the barrage. Flames licked wildly around 
the Jewish quarter. A dim glow  reddened the sky increasingly 
over a wider area. The whole Jewish section seemed aflame— 
a fiery furnace, a giant sacrifice offered to the gods of war and 
cruelty and savagery. As the gods lustily demanded more, 
more buildings toppled, more fi res were lit. Wider grew the 
glow of embers and hot stone, more sickening the stench of 
burning furniture, clothing, and dead bodies. 
Standing   on   the   roof  behind   sandbag   fortifications   I 
watched the inferno, the roasting alive of a city, the burning 326 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
to death of its temples, hol y places, holy books, holy memo- 
ries. I watched the carnage and it nauseated me. I turned to 
go downstairs just as another red flare—a call for help—shot 
out from somewhere in the ghetto. 
The school suddenly shook with renewed violence. Bren 
and Hotchkiss guns from the armored cars concentrated their 
fire upon a point just above where I was standing unpro- 
tected. Just as I raced inside I met Arab Legionnaires rushing 
up to the roof with machine-guns. I stepped aside quickly. 
A Jewish plane had been sighted , trying to locate the ghetto 
and drop supplies. It was a tiny plane, possibly one of the 
Piper Cub couriers used between  Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. The 
whirr of its single engine sounded lone, distant, low, like the 
magnified purring of a cat. 
A red flare shot into the dark from the ghetto. "Here we 
are," it said to the plane. The Arabs answered with a mag- 
nesium flare that lit up the area  with an uncanny light. The 
firing doubled in intensity. The Arabs were determined to 
bring down the plane. But it flew imperturbably back and 
forth, its drone just audible between bursts of machine-guns. 
Then it faded into the distance. No one knew whether it 
dropped anything. Like a mysterious bird it came, and left 
just as suddenly. 
The bombardment continued for another hour, then halted 
at midnight. The flesh had tired of firing and destroying. The 
Legion had done a good day's work, and even worked over- 
time. Now it was time to quit. My bedroom was the audi- 
torium of the school which had been used as a dormitory for 
children just before the Arabs took over. It was clean—by 
Arab standards; and it was reserved for the English deserters 
who were already snoring on the spring beds of the Arme- 
nians. In an adjoining bed sl ept Dan de Luce, the only one 
among the newshounds who got down to the soldier level and 
got a smell of it all. 
On the wall facing my cot was a painting of Christ, with a 
gaping hole through His left shoulder, at the spot where a The Last Exodus 327 
mortar shell had pierced the wall. A print of Mount Ararat— 
the historic Armenian mountain—was on the right. Other 
prints were of the Crucifixion, the carrying away of His body, 
and the Virgin. Beneath them, in  a corner, were bloodstained 
stretchers. The fly swarms buzzed  even at night. 1 put a hand- 
kerchief over my face as protection and fell asleep. 
I slept soundly and awoke at dawn of May 28—a day that 
was to prove almost as historic to Jewish destiny as May 1?. 
De Luce was already awake. He  washed, shaved, and despite 
his rumpled uniform and Arab Legion headdress, gleamed like 
a well-dressed American. I we nt around like an Arab, un- 
shaved, unpolished—happier that  way, and as unnoticed as a 
used towel. The Jews were begging for favorable surrender 
terms through the International Red Cross. There was much 
going back and forth by couriers. Everyone who had a wrist 
watch looked at it every few minutes. The deadline set by 
Abdullah el Tel was 1.30 p.m., by which time the surrender 
was to be accepted or the devastation would be resumed. 
There were rumors that the Jewish emissaries were on their 
way here. Other rumors floated about that all the Jews were 
dead. Liaison between the Legion and the correspondents was 
a sergeant, a decent fellow, as I found most of the Legion- 
naires to be except when they were fighting. 
"The native Arabs want to kill the Jews. It is good we are 
here. They have already begun to steal from the houses. We 
chase them away and even shoot at them, but they come back 
as soon as we leave." 
"How about the houses in the Armenian quarter?" I asked. 
"They were cleaned out long ago, before we arrived." 
The reporters, who had spent the night in comfort in 
Amman, returned by midmorning. The two queer ones had 
changed their attire; one carried a tourist camera that made 
him look even more absurd, if that was possible. The boys 
moved around in exclusive little cliques. They were away 
when an Arab Legion soldier came running toward the en- 
trance of the Armenian quarter . I followed. Above the heads 328 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of an approaching crowd, I could see a large white flag tacked 
on to a stick. It was the Jewish surrender party! The soldiers 
and local hangers-on parted, in silence, almost in respect. 
Holding the flag was the patriarchal figure of a rabbi in 
black garments, flowing beard, hobbling along on a cane. 
Rabbi Ben Zion Hazzan Ireq, seventy-two years of age, was a 
tall man, as Old City Jews went, and his head was high, not 
cringing in fear or cowardice. He was accompanied by a short, 
frightened wisp of a man, an ancient eighty-six-year-old Jew 
named Israel Zief Mintzbcrg. He had sad, shrunken little eyes, 
a sallow face and shiny black clothing, including a cape that 
came to his ankles. Mintzberg walked with quick, hesitant 
little steps, looking around as though he expected a blow from 
any quarter, somewhat bewildered that it hadn't yet come. 
The two, surrounded by Legionnaires, walked as if they had 
just emerged from a dark cellar, groping their way laboriously 
over the cobblestone pavement of the Armenian quarter. 
Through an arched doorway at the rear of the school they 
entered the confines of the Vank and were led by the back 
entrance into the basement. Th ey were seated on a bench and 
waited for Captain Mahmoud Bey Mousa. The Arabs, and 
later the newsmen who arrived, all excited, gathered around 
them. There was neither hostility nor jubilance from mem- 
bers of the Arab Legion. Representatives of the Ikhwan el 
Muslimin—from Egypt, Syria, and Palestine—prowled around 
savagely, growling at the treatment being accorded the emis- 
saries. 
''The Jews deserve only this. . . ." One of them made a 
cutting motion across his throat. 
The deliberations were brie f. When Captain Mahmoud ar- 
rived, he told the two, cur tly but politely, of the uncondi- 
tional terms of surrender. They were to accept or reject them. 
The two ancients left the way they came, carrying the white 
flag, through the Armenian quarter. The little Jew several 
times looked over his shoulder, as if still expecting the blow 
that never came. The Last Exodus 329 
Would the Jews accept the terms? No one knew. News- 
men were told to be on the alert. We waited an hour, two 
hours, nearly three hours, and still no word from the Jews. 
Why were they stalling? Was the Haganah planning to smash 
through Zion Gate again to liberate them? Mahmoud Bey 
ordered the resumption of firing. The soldiers began trouping 
back to the fighting front. 
A cry rose from the direction of Armenian quarter. "Ejou! 
Ejou! Here they come!" The Arabs around me began to 
shout. I rushed to get a ringside view. The party was shunted 
to a low stone building behind a thick, inaccessibly high 
stone wall opposite the School of the Holy Translators. En- 
trance was through a tomblike passageway surrounded by an- 
cient masonry and guarded by a thick iron door. Once inside, 
I found myself in a quaint old-world courtyard surrounded 
by stone buildings. On my right was the Armenian Church of 
the Holy Archangel. Its bell tower was bent with age, and the 
cross above it was also bent. A grapevine with roots some- 
where in the earth reached almo st the height of the belfry. 
A gust of wind sometimes moved the bells and one heard a 
lone, mournful gong; otherwise no bell had tolled since the 
Mandate's end. 
The squat stone edifice on my left—inside which the Jew- 
ish delegation was deliberating with Major Abdullah el Tel 
himself—was a holy shrine, the site of the House of Annas. 
After Christ was betrayed at Gethsemane He was dragged by 
the mob, which had come with "lanterns and torches and 
weapons," up Via Dolorosa and the Street of the Chain for a 
preliminary examination by Annas the Priest, after which He 
was taken to the House of Caiaphas on Mount Zion—a site 
commemorated now by the Church of the Holy Savior—where 
He was tried and condemned. On the following day, He ap- 
peared before Pilate. I wondered how many of those about 
me knew of the hallowed ground on which they stood, smok- 
ing, joking, and waiting impatiently for the surrender? 
At last a heavily armed officer of the Legion, a curved dag- 330 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ger at his waist, stepped out, after whom came Rabbi Ben 
Zion, Mukhtar Weingarten, and a bearded leader of the 
Haganah forces. The rabbi was escorted back to the Jewish 
quarter but Weingarten and the Haganah man, his arm in a 
sling, were surrounded in the courtyard. Dr. Pablo Azcarate, 
the worried-looking chief of the UN Commission, appeared 
and joined the principals. I edged up to Weingarten. He was 
of medium height, with bespectacled blue eyes, serious face, 
professorial beard, and a Western felt hat—strangely incon- 
gruous amid the colored khaffiyas. He looked like a preoccu- 
pied schoolmaster, with anything but a heroic appearance. As 
for the Haganah leader, he looked like a Talmudic student, 
with a pale, intellectual face. A nurse had also come with 
them—a thin slip of a girl w ho appeared exhausted and worn, 
dressed in a bloodstained white smock. 
In an impersonal voice Major Tel began reading the terms 
of the agreement: (1) The surrender of all arms and their 
seizure by the Arab Legion; (2) All able-bodied men to be 
taken as prisoners of war; (3) Old men, women, children, 
and all seriously wounded to be allowed to enter the New 
City through arrangements with the Red Cross; (4) The Arab 
Legion to guarantee the welfare of all Jews who surrendered; 
and (5) The Arab Legion to occupy the Jewish quarters. 
The terms were fair and merciful. "How about the women 
who fought as soldiers?" I asked the major. 
"They will be treated as civilians and returned with the 
others." 
"That's not fair to us. Their women shoot as well as the 
men." The voice was that of an English deserter, a rifle slung 
over his shoulder. 
THE LAST EXODUS 
IT WAS exactly 3.25 p.m. It was agreed that there should be 
no delay in removing the Jews, for once word got around, The Last Exodus 331 
thousands of Arabs would pounce on the quarter in an orgy 
of massacre and rapine which could be stopped only by Le- 
gion gunfire. With Dr. Azcarate and Weingarten leading the 
way, the crowd of soldiers, newsmen, and photographers 
walked down Zion Gate Way into the heart of the Jewish 
quarter. What a thorough job of devastation His Majesty's 
guns and ammunition had done to this area of the Holy City! 
The scene was a no-man's land of rubble and stone—a St. 
Lo, a Berlin, a Hiroshima in miniature—with charred bits of 
clothing and household effects scattered among the wreckage. 
A heavy bluish-gray haze hugged the buildings. It would not 
vanish or be dispersed in the tiny, twisted, tight little ghetto 
alleys. Was this an ectoplasm of the departed? 
Legion soldiers were flinging doorways open or breaking 
their way into locked homes. I followed them around. Most 
of the homes were empty. In one stone hovel we found a 
woman. She was either bedrid den, unwilling, or afraid to 
leave. She had on a green print housedress, and her hair fell 
wildly over her shoulders. She sat  on her bed, weeping with an 
all-out, soul-quaking lament of which only Orientals are cap- 
able. 
The Legion soldier ordered her to get out: "Imshil Imshil" 
She cried all the more, and hugged the bed. Apparently she 
wanted to die in this dark tomb. The soldier was about to use 
his rifle on her buttocks, when he saw me, changed his mind, 
and shouted again: "Imshi! Imshi!" The woman finally got 
off her bed. I noticed that her legs were swollen. She picked 
up a bundle, sat down once again, and was shoved out by the 
soldier to join other stragglers. It was the only act of semi- 
violence I saw on the part of the Arab Legion. I also witnessed 
many acts of courtesy and kindness to the old Jews. God in- 
deed was with them in this last hour of their final expulsion 
from a holy city turned unholy. 
I followed the soldiers. I had no idea where we were going. 
Every little while we would be forced to dash past a burning 
building and just miss being showered with flaming wreckage. 332 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
An Arab offered me a holy scroll in excellent state of preserva- 
tion. I feared to take it lest in the excitement I be identified 
as a Jew. Further, how could I carry it through Arab customs 
when I left the country? As my donor threw the scroll aside, 
someone trampled it. I saw a column of Jewish youths being 
marched back under heavy Legion guard. The cramped, 
twisted alleys—dating from the days of Christ and even 
David, a thousand years earlier—were a bedlam of jostling 
men, rubble, and refugees. 
Suddenly we emerged into a huge open area whose likeness 
has best been executed in th e classic paintings of Dante's 
inferno. Heavy bluish smoke hung over a mass of huddled 
people; I could see neither the sides of the square nor how far 
into the haze the human masses extended. On my right was a 
hospital; the smoke poured from the windows in slow, lazy 
spirals, as if unwilling to leave,  unwilling to consume the an- 
cient edifice. Everything here was rooted to the past. One who 
has not seen it cannot understand the extraordinary attach- 
ment of the body and flesh of man with the spirit and earth 
of Jerusalem. 
From group to group I moved, photographing the exodus. 
Here was a blind old Jew who seemed as ancient as the Bible, 
being led by his wife, almost as old as he, to the line-up of 
refugees about to leave the inferno. Here was a Jewish woman 
with a brood of children huddled around a swarm of baskets 
and bundles. Standing next to them was the long-bearded fig- 
ure of a Yeshiva scholar wearing the furred hat of the ancient 
scribes. Next to him was Sarah, the studious one; oblivious to 
her surroundings, she sat on her pack, a shopping basket be- 
tween her legs, reading audibly from a small prayerbook. I 
wondered which portion of the Holy Book absorbed her. Was 
it Jeremiah, Exodus, Lamentati ons? "How doth the city sit 
solitary, that was full of people! how is she become a widow! 
. . . She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her 
cheeks. . . . Judah is gone into captivity, because of afflic- 
tion, and because of great servitude. . . ." The Last Exodus 333 
Heavy packs were being lifted by frail old men, old women, 
and teen-agers (young and able-bodied men had already been 
made prisoners), and they hobbled away with their loads. One 
longed to help them, but help whom, how many? It was al- 
ready becoming dark; I wanted to see where these people were 
being taken. Where was the Haganah? I wanted to see with 
my own eyes those who had withstood the attack of thou- 
sands of Arabs for months, living on starvation rations and 
fighting with scanty ammunition, defying the might of the 
Arab Legion till neither flesh nor spirit could endure any 
more. 
I learned that the Jews were to leave the Old City through 
Zion Gate. I raced back through the ghetto streets and joined 
streams of refugees pouring into Zion Gate Way from another 
direction. A burning building before which they were about 
to pass suddenly gave way, an d crashed in an avalanche of 
cinders and stone. Terrified, they pulled back. The children 
huddled close to their mothers, whimpering pitifully. The 
refugees were led over an alternate route—passing over a pile 
of wreckage from an earlier fire. The Jews were ordered assem- 
bled together in the square before Zion Gate for a last minute 
check-up. I quote from the notes I made on the spot. 
The Exodus, Zion Gate, 7.00 p.m., May 28, 1948 
I'm sitting atop an English armored car, its mortar cannon 
and Hotchkiss machine-gun pointing to Zion Gate. I'm in 
dirty khaki, unshaven. My clothe s are soiled, my hair grimy 
from the soot and the cinders of the Old City. I'm fortunate, 
though not happy, to be here. The whole flow of miserable 
humanity has gathered in the s quare in front of me, beneath 
the ancient walls that have been  witness to so much bloodshed 
in the name of God, of Christ, of Allah. I am a modern wit- 
ness to an ancient tradition of the Holy Land being enacted 
in front of me. 
How quiet can a mob of 2,000 people be under the cir- 
cumstances? The front of the queue is already at Zion Gate, 334 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
trying to rush out of the hated city. They are crowding the 
narrow exit (everything is narrow and tight in this Old 
World) and are leaving at the proverbial snail's pace. There 
are some who do not want to go: the women especially seem 
unwilling. A few paces away I see a father literally dragging 
his wife with one arm, and a child by the other, both of whom 
are wailing and kicking and do not want to leave. These ugly, 
ancient streets and ugly ancient hovels are home to some 
people, as sweet-smelling and comfortable as homes in Gar- 
den City and Forest Hills, U. S. A. 
The shouts of the soldiers mix in with the wail of the women 
and the anguished cry of the men, and the eternal whimpering 
of the children. The cries of th e children and the agony of the 
very old tug most at the hear tstrings, for these are the most 
innocent and the most blameless. What sin has this child and 
this old old Jew committed to deserve this wrenching away 
from a home in which he was born, as were his father and 
grandfather before him? 
A burst of four shots has just crackled from a machine-gun! 
They echo back, redoubling the terror. My first instinct is to 
jump off and seek protection, but I must write what I see. I 
am sure that what has just raced through me has terrorized 
these people equally. Why the s udden shots? Is it the begin- 
ning of a pogrom now that all the Jews, separated from the 
Haganah, have been herded in one tiny square with most of 
them conveniently lined up agains t the wall? This was an old 
Turkish technique, dreaded by the Armenians. Is it now to 
become an Arab technique of extermination? 
The crowd huddles, tightens up, glues itself together, like a 
wave washing back on itself. The children have set up a piti- 
ful wail. A rifle shot has just rung out! Its effect is electrifying. 
Half the mob surges toward Zi on Gate, trampling those in 
front. The other half, in a wild stampede, tries to run the 
other way, back to the ghetto whose safety they had just left. 
It looks as though there'll be a panic—a panic that could be 
stopped only by Arab gunfire. Was this the intent of those The Last Exodus 335 
who set off the gunfire—to give th e soldiers an excuse to fire 
into the mob? 
Arab Legion officers are rushing among their men, shouting 
orders. They block the mob from fleeing back to the ghetto. 
There is considerable yelling,  hitting, fighting back as the 
people are jostled to and from Zion Gate, to and from the 
ghetto. They are like fish struggling inside a net. Above them 
the screaming of women rises clear to the darkening heaven. 
God, am I going to witness a massacre? I swear I'd fight on 
the side of the Jews and die with them—not because they are 
Jews but because now I'm an Armenian. I can't forget what my 
people suffered under the Moslem Turk. 
Order is finally restored. I'm amazed that this could be 
done. These Legion soldiers are amazingly well disciplined! 
My hat is off to their commander, Glubb Pasha! In the mean- 
while many packs have broken open, spilling the pitiful con- 
tents to the ground. These have been trampled upon and 
kicked around. Two cans of something—I cannot see, for it's 
getting dark—rolled down the s quare toward me. Bits of 
clothing, books and trinkets are strewn around. Women and 
men repack their bundles, dragging them when they are too 
heavy. 
An elderly woman is trying to lift her pack to her shoulder. 
It looks too heavy for her. She is trying to put it on her head, 
but can't lift it that high. She's now leaning it against the 
wall, inching it up, hoping to get under it. The weight is too 
heavy ... no one is helping her . . . she can't make it, and 
falls down with it. She remains on the ground, her legs 
sprawled, a bewildered look on her face. The pack has rolled 
down beside her. 
These bookish old Jews amaze me. Here an aged rabbi is 
standing off by himself beneath the towering walls. Under his 
arm is a round bundle, containing all his belongings. With his 
free arm he is holding a holy book, reading, and swinging his 
head from side to side. Perhaps he was reciting the Kaddish, 
the memorial prayer for the dead. Could anything be more 336 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
appropriate for the o ccasion? This orthodox Jew at prayer, the 
pitiful screams of the children , and the dark mass of humanity 
ebbing in a black tide toward Zion Gate, now a gaping black 
hole, are my last unforgettable impressions of the Last Exodus. 
I see now a single file of prisoners emerging from Zion 
Gate Way into the square. They look young. They are the 
Haganah! 
There were about 250 of them, the youths mixed in with 
able-bodied men up to about fifty years of age. They were 
lined up. Each was searched for arms, after which their bags 
and bundles were examined. I walked among them, studying 
their faces, looking into their eyes. They were uniformly short, 
most of them puny, thin, and tired, as unheroic-looking a 
group of first-rate fighters as I' ve ever seen. (Later I learned 
that only forty among them were actual Haganah members, 
the others being shopkeepers and students turned emergency 
fighters.) The sorry lot were marched into the Vank com- 
pound and spent the night in the Seminary Building1 and 
elsewhere on the grounds. 
That night the Jewish quarter was put to the torch, and 
burned from one end to the other, a huge conflagration con- 
suming everything that had survived the other fires. I photo- 
graphed the holocaust from the school rooftop. The unburied 
bodies under rubble and those buried since the Mandate's end 
were cremated once again. Ho mes and hospitals and syna- 
gogues and shops were burned to  their foundations. And the 
city wherein Jews had lived al most continuously for some 
3,500 years was destroyed as never before—a job more thor- 
ough than when Titus leveled it, for the old-fashioned Roman 
general had no dynamite, and neith er guns nor shells with the 
markings of His Majesty's Army. 
1 They were eventually trucked away  to a prisoner-of-war camp, under 
International Red Cross supervision, at  Mafrak, Jordan. Disappointed in the 
capture of such a small number of Haga nah, Jordan officials took along civil- 
ians to make a more impressive showing of the Jewish resistance. The Last Exodus 337 
The Exodus was over, the graveyard sealed. The Jew had no 
reason, now, to return to the holy site of his antecedents. It 
was as Allah—and the British Fo reign Office—wished matters 
to be. 
LIBERATION 
THE next day King Abdullah of Jordan, conquerer and new 
master of the Old City, arrived. He visited the Church of the 
Holy Sepulchre. I waited outside. He emerged—a neat, gray- 
ing man of sixty-six, with a short, trimmed beard, deep-set 
eyes and thick brows. He was dressed in a suit of army khaki, 
which was probably borrowed, for it fitted him badly, his shirt 
cuffs coming down to his fingertips. Anxious to get his pic- 
ture, I called out: 
"Will Your Majesty please stand still for a moment?" 
While the king didn't know English, he understood, and 
obligingly posed for a rare photo that I took as he stood in 
front of the Holy Sepulchre surrounded by churchmen of the 
Latin, Greek, Armenian, Coptic, and Syrian churches. 
At that precise moment, I heard a rumble, then another, 
louder. I had a hunch where it was coming from. I rushed to 
the roof of the Armenian school. The sun shone radiantly 
everywhere except on the Jewish quarter. Over it hung mo- 
tionless a pall of ghastly purplish-gray haze, with fires still 
raging here and there, and bl ack smoke spiraling through. 
Only one wall remained standing of the huge sextagonal 
Hurvath Synagogue Beth Jacob, a landmark of the Old City, 
whose foundation dated from about the twelfth century. I 
saw the wall dimly through the dust pit that enveloped the 
area. And now the seventh dynamite charge went off, and the 
last wall of the ancient structur e joined the others in the huge 
burial mound that was now the Jewish quarter. The great 
Nissim Back Synagogue had been destroyed earlier. The un- 338 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
derground synagogue of Yoha nnan ben Zakkai (reputedly 
standing for two thousand years), and twenty-six other syna- 
gogues, were buried under the rubble. 
I came down the stairs. In the basement I found the Legion- 
naire who was liaison with the press. 
"I'd like to walk through the Jewish quarter," I said. "Will 
you let me?" 
"You will not only get lost, but it will not be safe for you 
to go alone. I will get someone to go with you." 
Accompanied by an English-speaking Legionnaire, I began 
my tramp through the desolation. A horde of looters, includ- 
ing numerous children, shuttle d in and out of the Miscab 
Ladach Hospital carting booty on their heads, or loading it on 
donkeys and homemade wagons. We followed the mob from 
street to street, penetrating deeper into the ghetto. They were 
carrying away everything that was left intact: chairs, tables, 
scraps of clothing, earthen jars, tile, bedsprings. A woman car- 
ried a huge wooden box over her head. I saw two children 
weighed down under a washbowl, followed by another youth 
with a large basket on his shoulder. The ultra-orthodox Mos- 
lem women gathered the loot with their black veils religiously 
drawn over their features. Legion soldiers were everywhere— 
not to prevent looting but to preserve law and order among 
the wild beggars and thieves of the Holy City. 
Climbing over the mountains of stones, I looked upon the 
pitiful sight that was once the glory of Hurvath Synagogue. 
A particularly thorough job of demolition had been done 
here. On one wall, left partially standing, was a plaque with 
the Ten Commandments. Only this  remained to warn a reck- 
less world and an impotent UN of the words of the Law: 
"Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shalt not 
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will 
not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain. . . ." 
Sheets of the holy scrolls were strewn all over the rubble. I 
rescued a small roll of parchment, burnt and discolored from 
heat, and tucked it inside my shirt. The Last Exodus 339 
"I will take it to America as a souvenir of the great Arab 
victory," I said to my soldier companion. 
I found a scorched circular that somehow had escaped the 
fire. I read in English: 
The Grand Synagogue "Beth Jacob" in Hurvath Rabbi 
Yehuda Hachassid at Jerusalem Jewry, of great historical sig- 
nificance, where all official, religious and national festivals 
and ceremonies are celebrated. . . . 
It is an ancient and generally accepted tradition for the 
Jewish tourist, visiting Jerusalem, to attend, at least once, the 
Services conducted in this Sy nagogue either on a Sabbath or 
on a holiday. . . . 
For the sake of Jewish Jerusalem, we respectfully request 
ail Jewish tourists coming to our City to pay honour to this 
House of God, to visit it and worship therein on Sabbaths 
and Holidays and to please offe r their material contributions 
for its maintenance and to thus enable its further existence. 
May all donors be blessed with Zion's blessings. 
As I looked at the devastation around me, the Legionnaire 
spoke up. He motioned to me to come behind a crumbled 
fence: "Here is the Jewish atom bomb. It fell in the Arme- 
nian section." He was pointing to the "Davidka"—one of the 
duds that had fallen. It had a homemade look about it: a fat, 
rocketlike cast-iron stovepipe containing a powerful charge of 
explosive. "When the Jews began firing these we had orders 
to die at our post, or be shot," he said. 
For better or worse, the Davidka impressed me as being as 
much a symbol of the New Israel as the devastation around 
me was a symbol of Old Israel in the tragic Old City. I be- 
lieved this Exodus of 1948 was Hi s mystic way of demonstrat- 
ing that the days of His children sitting in solitude to mourn 
were counted; that He was taking them across a shell-torn 
Sinai into a New Promised Land, for them to labor in and 
convert to a land of milk and honey as an example for the 
Arab, and for the British, and for all the world to witness. 340 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I BID THE PATRIARCH GOOD-BYE 
I COULD not leave this area without visiting the Church of 
the Holy Sepulchre. I found it blocked by a dozen guides in 
bizarre striped suits. They clawed me and fought among them- 
selves for the privilege of guiding me through the holy Chris- 
tian shrine. In disgust I looked up to heaven and said loudly: 
"God, what I'm about to say or do is no more sacrilegious 
than what is now before your church. If you tolerate these 
thieving hoodlums, then surely  you will forgive me for my 
actions. , . ." 
With this I let loose a barrage of oaths in English, Turkish, 
Armenian, as well as French, Italian, and Arabic. Aiming a 
kick at the one nearest me, but missing him, I strode with 
righteous feeling into the shrine. Here I met an Armenian 
priest who guided me, and spoke  to me in my tongue, and 
waited outside while I went and knelt at the Sepulchre of 
Christ, and prayed. 
Afterward, I went to the Armenian monastery before the 
gate closed for the night, to bid the Patriarch good-bye. I 
found him greatly relieved after the surrender, but worried as 
to how he would feed, clothe, and care for 3,800 hungry, 
homeless, mostly penniless Armenians. 
"God has brought our people safely thus far. He will see us 
through," I found myself telling the Patriarch. Then I asked 
for his blessing. 
The Patriarch placed his hand on my head and prayed long 
and earnestly. After he had finished on my behalf, I looked 
up. He was still praying. "Oh God, protect our people in these 
desperate days. Give them of Your strength, and of Your wis- 
dom that they may survive, and not despair. . . ." With his 
eyes closed and the palms of his hands raised heavenward, and 
his long full beard, the Patriarch's sensitive face had taken on 
a deep mystic quality. . . . "Endow them with Your courage, The Last Exodus 341 
oh God, that they may live through this, another ordeal, in a 
life of so many such ordeals. Help them, oh God. Preserve our 
people, and bless our nation that we may continue to serve 
Thee for evermore. Amen." 
It was my last visit to the monastery, and the last time I 
saw His Beatitude alive, for he succumbed to the ravages of a 
chronic disease that was aggravated by the burdens of his 
calling.2 
Picking up my bag, I trudged to the Petra, one of the lead- 
ing hotels in the Old City. I found it full of volunteer soldiers. 
The clerk carefully inspected my  Arab credentials. The inspec- 
tion seemed endless until I put a heavy tip on the counter. 
"Thank you, thank you. Tafadda l, tafaddal. Please, please," 
he said, and candle in hand, led the way to a room that had 
the look and the shape of a vaulted sarcophagus. I hesitated 
about going in: lone, dark, damp, with a barred window, it 
was not only filthy but actually unsafe. The door had no lock. 
I had seen enough of the looters to distrust them thoroughly. 
"With my own life I guard you," he promised. 
I slipped him another tip, and was on the verge of closing 
the door when the clerk spoke again. 
"I am sorry I have no DDT for you," he apologized. 
"Never mind," I said. "I have a box." 
I found the room impenetrably dark. Lighting a match I 
spied an ancient spring bed that reeked of fleas and bedbugs, 
or worse. I hoped there were no rats, I pulled the bed against 
the door, after which I doused myself with DDT, threw my 
baggage on board and jumped on, shoes and all, atop the 
covers, praying that I would have no visitors during the night, 
from beneath the bed, or from outside! 
2 He died on October 28, 1949. A devot ed humanitarian, he was equally 
the friend of Moslem, Christian, and Jew. President Chaim Weizmann tele- 
graphed the Armenian Church representative in Jaffa; 
GREATLY MOVED TO LEARN OF THE PASSING AWAY OF HIS BEATITUDE 
THE PATRIARCH GUREGH ISRAELIAN, BELOVED FATHER OF THE ARMENIAN 
COMMUNITY AND SINCERE FRIEND OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE; PLEASE CON- 
VEY MY  DEEPEST  CONDOLENCES  TO  THE ARMENIAN  COMMUNITY. (CHAPTER XIX) 
BETHLEHEM AND JERICHO 
"We [are] the nucleus of so mething much bigger to 
come. We want to build the future of the Arab 
world on a military basis. We are in a coma now. 
It will take us at least ten years to awaken. Only 
military regimes can accomplish this. . . ." 
Captain Moustafa Kamal Sidki, 
Egyptian Intelligence officer 
I AWOKE to the violent shaking of my bed. It was morning, 
and I took a quick look around the room, my eyes alighting 
on a broken-down chair. . . . The bed shook again, more 
violently, and a voice called out: 
"Open! Open!" 
"Who are you?" 
"Friend of Captain Zaki. Open." 
Zaki was no particular friend, so I peered cautiously through 
the widened crack and recognized Musa, one of the volun- 
teers I had met at Zaki's Sylwan village headquarters. The 
Arab had learned of my stay from the talkative hotel clerk, 
and was showing off to the other Arabs that he knew the 
Amrikani personally. There was nothing to do but open the 
door and welcome him and a half dozen of his companions. 
"Why aren't you with Zaki?" I asked. Bethlehem and Jericho 343 
"Egyptian volunteers leaving. Arab Legion no like Egyp- 
tians." 
"And where is Captain Zaki?" 
"Him going back to Egypt today. I go also." 
"Which way are you going?" 
"By Bethlehem, Hebron, Gaza. . . . We meet Moustafa 
in Bethlehem." 
Moustafa! So he was alive! I had to see him before I went 
on to Amman. 
I hurried with Musa to the taxi terminal. He was supposed 
to meet Zaki and his companions at nine. We had a leisurely 
breakfast and were on hand at ten. Zaki showed up with 
Ismail and three others at about eleven—the usual margin in 
most Arab appointments. Zaki was more surly than ever. I 
resorted to a time-honored device, flattery, 
"You are looking very well this morning," I said to Ismail. 
He beamed with pleasure, and giggled. "How nice your uni- 
form looks on you, how neatly pressed and well-fitting. . . ." 
Zaki turned a jealous glance  on me. I decided I had gone 
far enough and broached my de sire to accompany his men to 
Bethlehem. 
"It is military territory. You are an Armenian and also an 
American. It is not safe for you,  and it is dangerous for us to 
be with you." 
Ismail took up my side, and eventually won. Zaki decided 
finally that I could come along. 
"Let me wear your wrist watch till we get to Bethlehem," 
he said, blandly. 
"Perhaps I shall give it to you as a gift after we arrive safely 
there," I replied, and we let the matter rest there. 
Our vehicle was a new English ar my half-truck, driven by a 
young Arab who had picked it up (undoubtedly it was stolen 
property) at a bargain. He had decided to make a living as a 
trucker and—at the same time —learn how to drive. We 
leaped on board and had hardly moved fifty yards when we 
had an accident. The smashed taxi-fender was hardly worth 344 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
the hour's wild oratory and swearing, and the argument was 
finally settled by the payment of a few Palestinian pounds. It 
was after one o'clock when we got started. 
The Arab drove well on straight, flat ground, but hills, 
downgrades, and curves made him nervous. Unfortunately, 
the terrain was among the most rugged and serpentine in all 
Palestine. The road dipped up and down and twisted con- 
stantly. On the far left we passed Bethphage, revered as the 
sanctuary from which Christ started on Palm Sunday on his 
triumphal entry into Jerusalem. We whizzed past Bethany, 
catching a bare glimpse of the churches that commemorate 
the spot where Christ performed one of His greatest miracles, 
the raising of Lazarus from the dead. 
IN THE WILDERNESS OF JUDEA 
AS WE plunged down a steep incline, the driver suddenly 
slammed the brakes and we all piled up in a heap. Ismail gig- 
gled. The truck started fitfully, then slowed to a halt at the 
bottom of the hill. It followed a wadi for several hundred 
yards, after which it picked up wh at appeared to be little more 
than a goat trail. We creaked and groaned over boulders and 
road pits into the Wilderness of Judea. Deeper and deeper 
we went into a desolation that had scarcely changed since the 
days of Moses—barren wastes, hills with nothing but rocks, 
boulders, and occasional patches of scrub. 
After nearly two tortuous hours, choking with dust and 
aching with the violent battering we had undergone, we came 
to a sight that terrified me. The road led straight to the side 
of a towering mountain, then crawled along a ledge dug into 
the living rock. Below us was the wildest, most frightful gorge 
I have ever seen, so deep that its bottom was lost in the mists. 
The walls—layers of reddish maroon stone—rose perpendicu- 
larly to awesome heights. Separating us from the brink of dis- Bethlehem and Jericho 345 
aster was a low rock fence strung along the road's edge, as high 
as our hub caps. The driver seemed to have lost his nerve: he 
inched along slower than a trot . As we skirted the weird can- 
yon's rim, hugging the safety of the mountainside, to my 
astonishment I saw that people had once lived here. There 
was a series of man-made entrances to caves, with steps dug 
roughly into the rock. I had read that hermits and ascetics 
often lived in these forsaken ar eas; that Christ was tempted 
by the devil in this same J udean wilderness; that John the 
Baptist preached here. Further on we saw a small monastery, 
teetering over the dizzy precipice, then a larger one, then one 
still larger and truly magnificent, embedded in the rock. They 
were Greek Orthodox sanctuaries, where no women were al- 
lowed to step foot and monks died without seeing anyone out- 
side the forbidding walls. 
I turned to Zaki. "I wonder how we will find Moustafa." 
Zaki rubbed the red dust from his lips. "I don't know," he 
said gruffly. 
The car lurched violently and we all held on for dear life 
again. It was no time for social intercourse. 
After a hairpin curve we began to climb still higher. A 
majestic panorama spread before us: to the dim distant right 
were the spires and skyline of Jerusalem; to our left were the 
terrifying gorges and chasms in a ll the hues of the wild Judean 
sunset; behind, the rock-hewn mountains plunged into the 
deep azure waters of the Dead Sea; while directly ahead the 
city of Bethlehem began to l oom. We came to another hair- 
pin curve, spiraling upward so steeply that our engine, grind- 
ing in first gear, could not pull us up. From the front seat the 
driver frantically shouted to us to get out and push. With the 
alternative of toppling backward, even Zaki bestirred his fat 
rump and, together with the giggling Ismail, helped heave un- 
til at last we found ourselves on the level ground of a high 
plateau, with Bethlehem directly ahead. It was almost dusk 
when we arrived. It had required five hours to travel the thirty 
tortuous miles. 346 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"You are now an expert driver," I told the Arab. "But I 
wish you had picked a safer road on which to learn." 
"Allah, Allah! I still have to go back to Jerusalem on that 
road." 
"Then may Allah have mercy on your soul, brother. Ma 
salama." 
Zaki came over, eying my wrist watch. "Would you like to 
see Moustafa?" 
"Where is he?" I asked eagerly. 
"He is captain of a company here in Bethlehem. He is at 
headquarters down the road." Zaki edged up to me. "The 
wrist watch. Will you give it to me now?" 
"It is a gift from a girl." I didn't think Zaki would appre- 
ciate the sentiment, but I had told him the truth. "Look!" 
I unclasped the band, and holding it firmly, showed him the 
inscription. "See, it says 'Marie to Arthur.' How can I part 
with it, Zaki? Would you give aw ay Ismail's gift—if he could 
afford to give you one?" 
Once again Ismail came to my rescue, and I willingly agreed 
to send Zaki an identical watch after I returned to America. 
". . . WHERE CHRIST WAS BORN OF MARY" 
I HURRIED to Arab headquarters on the outskirts of Beth- 
lehem, but Moustafa was off on a mission. I had counted on 
him to arrange lodging for me. Luckily, an Armenian mon- 
astery was adjacent to the Chur ch of the Nativity, for the 
Armenian Church in Bethlehem, as in Jerusalem, was among 
the custodians of the holy sh rines. Our Vank here was of 
formidable appearance, with a high, buttressed wall and tiny 
grilled windows. There was no telephone and no electric door- 
bell, so I yelled at the top of my voice. No one heard me. I 
resorted to a childhood habit: th rowing stones, this time with Bethlehem and Jericho 347 
the earnest hope that I'd break no windows. The face of a 
bearded priest became visible behind a pane. 
"I'm an Armenian from Ameri ca," I shouted in Armenian. 
"I come with the Patriarch's blessings and bring you news 
from Jerusalem." 
In a few moments an iron door creaked and an attendant 
with a candle beckoned me. He ushered me into the presence 
of the Reverend Mesrop Depoyan, spiritual shepherd of the 
few hundred Armenians taking refuge at the Vank. I found 
myself in a cozy room furnished with a bed, several settees on 
which were stacks of Bibles, a desk, and a kerosene lamp. I 
found this servant of the church, with flowing beard and gen- 
tle manners, in a sorrowful mood. The tragedy of the war was 
etched on his face. Prematurely gray strands liberally sprinkled 
his beard and wrinkles lined his face. 
"Our hearts are heavy in Bethlehem," he said with a deep 
sigh, after greeting me and I had told him how I had last left 
the Patriarch. "Last night, in this birthplace of Christ, the 
heavens and the earth again shoo k with the violence of war. 
All night long guns roared their defiance of the Christian 
spirit. The savagery of it all, the bestiality to which man 
stoops. I have seen a girl's stomach split open and a rock 
placed in it. I have seen human heads rolling down the streets 
of Bethlehem. I have seen the skull of the dead broken so 
gold could be extracted from the teeth. I have even seen the 
dead desecrated with knives and kicked by the boots of mad- 
dened men. Once upon a time the Arabs and the Jews lived 
like brothers. Now someone comes from the outside, gives 
one, then the other, a knife, saying: 'Go, slay your brother!' 
. . . Oh, the ways of God are often inexplicable. Perhaps 
some good will come of all this evil. Perhaps it is His way of 
testing the righteous and rallying them to His side. Asdvad- 
zim, gamkut gadarvi. God, may Thy will be done." 
The hour was late. The priest reached over to the brazier 
and stirred the charcoals. From a pitcher he poured water into 348 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
a tiny, hourglass-shaped brass pot, added a spoonful of coffee, 
then sugar, then a pinch of cardamon seed. He buried the pot 
in the coals until the coffee came to a boil. Then he poured 
some in one demi-tasse cup, then in another, evenly distribut- 
ing the frothy head. I sipped the delicious brew, the cardamon 
seeds giving it a rare oriental aroma unlike anything served on 
the other side of the Atlantic. When we had finished, the 
priest Said: 
"I have burdened you with our plight. Forgive me. I hope 
you will sleep well." With this he  left me after insisting that 
I sleep in his room. 
Breakfast the next morning consisted of coffee, bread, and 
jam, preceded and followed by profuse apologies. "Will you 
stay for dinner?" Reverend Depoyan asked. "I promise you it 
will be different." 
"Thank you, but I must visit my Egyptian friends," I said. 
"We have a few chickens left. We will kill one in your 
honor, the plumpest one in the lot," he suggested hopefully, 
"and have it with pilav and rich sauce." 
The poor man's mouth was drooling, for a plump chicken 
is a luxury in the Middle East, and he could never conscien- 
tiously serve so sumptuous a dinner to himself alone. 
"I shall be equally grateful if you will show me the Grotto," 
I said. 
We entered the Church of the Nativity. Its grandeur lay in 
its extreme simplicity. Long, colored columns and a mosaic 
flooring led the pilgrim to the Greek, Armenian, and Latin 
altars. We descended a series of steps, and then entered a 
low-ceilinged grotto, adorned with holy objects, tapestries, and 
paintings. It was lighted by numerous lamps, and its floor was 
of white marble. It was the Grotto of the Nativity, birthplace 
of the Christ Child. On the actual site of the Manger was a 
slab of resplendent white marble inlaid with a star in colored 
stone. Opposite the Manger was an altar dedicated to the 
three Wise Men who "when they were come into the house, 
they saw the young Child with Mary His mother, and fell Bethlehem and Jericho 349 
down, and worshipped Him." Near  by were the steps—eleven 
steep stone steps—said to have been used by Mary and Joseph 
in their flight to Egypt. 
"Will you join me in prayer?" Father Depoyan said. 
Together we knelt at the altar of the Prince of Peace. I 
prayed for peace in the Holy La nd, and for peace in the world, 
after which Father Depoyan gave me a dozen holy wafers and 
bade me Godspeed. "When you return to America," he 
pleaded, "please strive to bring peace to us. Asdvadz parin 
gadareh. May God perform the good." 
I promised to do the impossible when I arrived in America. 
MOUSTAFA AND HIS MEN OF THE SABOTAGE 
IT WAS high noon when I walked into the Egyptian head- 
quarters again. Moustafa was still away, but was expected back 
any minute. I sat under a tree and waited for him. Soon I 
heard him down the road. His rough, barking voice hadn't 
changed, and he was in top form—boasting of his prowess to 
a gang of men walking with hi m, among them Captain Zaki. 
Moustafa's skin had grown darker; his face and moustache 
wilder than ever; he had the same old uniform, which looked 
as though it hadn't been taken off since our last meeting. I 
liked this wild, shaggy Arab: he was earthy. 
"Moustafa!" I extended my hand. 
He ignored it. "Zaki has been telling me about you. I must 
go tell Colonel Azziz." He sounded deeply hurt. 
"Let us first sit and talk together for old friendship's sake, 
Moustafa, after which you can do anything. Hang me, if you 
wish. I'm at your mercy." 
We talked for an hour. I refuted Zaki's charges and showed 
Moustafa my new credentials from Major Abdullah el Tel. 
"Zaki is jealous because Ismail has been smiling at me. He is 
also angry because I have not given him my watch." 350 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Apparently satisfied about me, Moustafa began talking 
about himself, a subject he enjoyed. He had plenty of money 
now and offered to pay for some of the pictures I had taken 
of him. "Give it to the poor," I said, which pleased him. He 
told me he had been put in charge of a commando unit called 
"men of the sabotage." 
"My men of the sabotage—fifty of us—and four hundred 
other Egyptians advanced on the Jews of Ramat Rachel un- 
der a smoke screen. We started at ten in the morning, under 
heavy artillery fire. We blasted at the barbed wire and crawled 
under it. Then we bravely walked over the mine fields. Seeing 
us, the Jews ran by the hundreds. We killed many and threw 
their bodies in the fire." 
"How many men did you lose?" 
"None. Only one was wounded, slightly," Moustafa said as 
I listened soberly to his tale of  bloodless victory. "The Egyp- 
tian flag was waving over Ramat Rachel by eleven o'clock. 
We found cows—beautiful, fat cows. We found chickens— 
thousands of nice, fat, plum p chickens. Every man grabbed 
two, ripped off the heads, and ro asted them in the fires of the 
burning buildings. We ate chickens all day." 
"Then what happened?" I asked Moustafa. 
"I was still eating chicken when  the cowardly Jews attacked. 
They caught us by surprise by sneaking up on us at midnight. 
The Jews never show themselves in battle until they are on 
top of you. They never fight so that you can see them. Cow- 
ards! I took one last bite and ordered my men to retreat. But 
we will capture the village back  again. We will chase the Jew 
out of Palestine. . . . 
"Insh'allah," for the hundred-a nd-first time. "Insh'allah, 
Moustafa." 
"I will report to Colonel Azziz about you now, and also to 
the Intelligence chief," Moustafa said, leaving me under the 
fig tree, wondering what he meant. 
He reappeared soon. "The Colonel wishes you a good wel- 
come. Later you must be cleared by the Intelligence chief." Bethlehem and Jericho 351 
CAPTAIN SIDKI TALKS 
I WAS worried. It would not be difficult to find loopholes in 
the story of my "escape" from the Haganah. I followed Mou- 
stafa to headquarters where, to my surprise, Moustafa and I 
were invited to have supper with Colonel Azziz, in charge of 
Egyptian forces in Bethlehem, and several of his officers. 
Later, the tallest of these—a sharp-featured Arab of about 
twenty-five, with a deep oliv e complexion and piercing black 
eyes—summoned me to his room. He drew the blinds. Sitting 
on the chair with a gas lamp behind him, he looked at me in- 
tently without saying a word. 
"May I ask who you are?" I broke the silence. 
"I'm Captain Moustafa Kamal Sidki, in charge of Intelli- 
gence in this area." 
"Moustafa has told me about you." 
"He has told me about you, too. Captain Zaki has also 
talked to me." 
"Of the two whom do you believe?" 
"We will come to that," he said. "I understand you are a 
reporter for Al Misri. May I see your credentials—all of 
them?" Under the gaslight he  examined each minutely, in- 
cluding those given me by Major Abdullah el Tel. 
"The Arab Legion is no friend of Egypt," he said, heatedly. 
"What's wrong with the Arab Legion?" I asked innocently. 
"Everything," he snapped, eyes blazing. "They're not Arab. 
They're British agents, British tools. ... I am a strong Arab 
nationalist. I was released from prison only four months ago 
with seventeen other officers." 
"The charge must have been serious," I said, surprised at 
his candor. 
"Yes. Plotting against the government. We were all na- 
tionalists—the nucleus of something much bigger to come. 
We want to build the future of the Arab world on a military 352 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
basis. We are in a coma now. It will take us at least ten years 
to awaken. Only military regimes can accomplish this, and at 
the same time protect us from our enemies—England and the 
Jews." 
"What is your program?" I asked. 
"To rid Palestine of the Jew though it takes a hundred 
years. Our motto is: 'God and Nation, Egypt First!' We 
trust no one except the military. We have learned much from 
the Germans. All Egyptian officers respect German militarism 
and admire the way the Germans we re able to fight against the 
whole world. The other Arab countries will follow our ex- 
ample—when they see that we ha ve the solution of the Jewish 
problem, the British problem, the home problem." 
"You are speaking very frankly with me," I said. "I appre- 
ciate that." 
"It's because I think you are one American who is sympa- 
thetic to us." His black eyes were fastened on me. "You 
are, aren't you?" 
"Oh, yes, yes," I said. 
There was a sharp knock on the door. 
At the door Moustafa waited to escort me to my sleeping 
quarters. As I left, Captain Sidki urged me to call on him again 
tomorrow. I followed Moustafa to  a large house, where I spent 
the night. The next morning Mous tafa said: "I will show you 
what we did to the Jews." 
Through a thicket he led me to a camouflaged observation- 
post, and I saw what remained of Kibbutz Ramat Rachel. It 
was a total ruin, a tangle of wreckage and twisted metal. But 
perched on a pole atop a burned- out chimney the blue and 
white flag of Medinat Yisrael waved its grim defiance to the 
Egyptian army. The Arabs had failed dismally in their mis- 
sion—thanks to the prowess of the defenders and to Ramat 
Rachel's luscious, "nice, plum p chickens," which had drugged 
and distracted the Arabs sufficiently from the mundane task 
of defending a newly won position to enable the Jews to 
counterattack successfully. As we stood looking at the scene, Bethlehem and Jericho 353 
I chose this moment to break the news to Moustafa that I 
was leaving. 
"Where are you going, Artour?" 
"I want to see the rest of the Arab countries, Moustafa." 
I found it hard to take leave of my friend. Once again, in 
the face of Zaki's vile charges, he had saved my life. I could 
easily have been disposed of otherwise, for Captain Sidki and 
his fellow fanatics were sole custodians of law and order in the 
area. We walked together down the road—the big shaggy 
Arab and the American journalist. Culturally and intellectu- 
ally we were worlds apart. Yet we had much in common. It is 
difficult to explain, perhaps because it was a thing of the 
spirit: the bond between one human being and another, the 
common heritage of a common birth, the oneness of a com- 
mon brotherhood. How superficial and petty are the artificial 
distinctions of religion and r ace when God, in His infinite 
wisdom, and Nature with her immutable laws, have created 
one universal race of man from which we have all stemmed. 
"Good-bye, Artour." 
"Good-bye, Moustafa." 
TO JERICHO 
TO REACH Amman, capital of Jordan, one had to return 
to Jerusalem. I learned of a rout e back to the Holy City more 
direct than that over which I had been driven so recklessly. 
It was largely a wild donkey path, skirting the Wilderness of 
Judea, and snaking its way between towering hills. As most of 
it was unguarded, it was also used by smugglers in trafficking 
with the Jews. Several small Arab villages lay on the way. 
I started out in late afternoon when donkey and cart traffic 
was heavy. To meet any emergencies, from a piece of rope I 
fashioned something that looked—or was supposed to look— 
like a cross. I hung it around my neck. I pinned the Arme- 354 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
nian medallion and St. Christopher's medal (with the Jewish 
mezuzah attached from the same chain) conspicuously on my 
chest. I put a small Bible in the breast pocket of my military 
shirt so that it protruded slightly. Learning the Arabic word 
for "Christian pilgrim," haj Nosrani, I sallied forth, knapsack 
on shoulder, every inch of me shrieking the stranger and the 
Christian pilgrim from somewhere. 
When peasants and villagers s poke first, I answered them 
solemnly, first touching my heart, lips, and forehead with my 
fingers: 
"Ma salama. Ana haj Nosrani. Peace be with you. I am a 
Christian pilgrim." 
"Allah ma'ak," they said. "God be with you." 
To those who wanted to carry on a conversation, I ex- 
plained: 
"Ana Inglisi. Muta'asif la ahki Arabic I'm English. I am 
sorry I don't speak Arabic. Salam Allah aleikum. God's peace 
be upon you." 
Gangs of armed toughs challe nged me often, appearing 
suddenly from behind stone fences and buildings. My re- 
sponses became a matter of instin ct. Whenever I came to an 
Arab outpost, I walked boldly into the compound, asked to 
see the chief, told him I had just met with Colonel Azziz, 
and demanded safe conduct through his lines. Inevitably I 
found someone who knew English and acted as interpreter. 
Finally I reached the last barrier before Jerusalem—the 
military outpost at the Arab village of Sur Bahir, about two 
miles from the Holy City. Perched atop a hill was a large stone 
building literally teeming with the familiar wild-eyed volun- 
teers. In charge was a surly Arab who spoke English. He scru- 
tinized my credentials, then went through my knapsack, 
finding only a few clothes and mother-of-pearl souvenirs 
from Bethlehem. He ordered one of his men to search me 
for arms. Then he leaned over and examined my medallions. 
"What is this?" he asked, fingering the Jewish mezuzah. Bethlehem and Jericho 355 
"That is part of the other medal/' I said. "You can see it 
is on the same chain." 
"Why has it no cross?" 
"If it is blessed by a priest, it needs no cross." 
He looked at me suspiciously for a moment. "I'm not sat- 
isfied with you," he said brusquely. "There are many who 
cross to the Jewish side and back. Some are smugglers. Others 
are not. We see them at a distance and shoot. Sometimes we 
catch them. Qassab, Qassab!" He called an orderly, then 
turned to me: "I am not holding you prisoner, but you will 
be my guest till tomorrow. You may move about in Sur Bahir 
but you must not leave. Tomorrow we will take you to the 
Old City for questioning. It is now late." 
"You can telephone headquarters and ask about me. I am 
friend of Major el Tel." 
"We have no telephone. Tomo rrow we will go. Be pa- 
tient." 
I accompanied the orderly and another soldier to a large 
building that seemed to be used as officers' quarters. It was al- 
most deserted at this hour, with only a few Arabs about. I was 
taken to the courtyard of the h ouse. The soldier said gruffly: 
"You stay here inside. I come after and give you room." Then 
he and the orderly both left me. 
I had no intention of remaining anyone's "guest." The 
house was on a quiet street, with narrow alleys branching from 
it. If I made a break, and was caught, I'd be locked up. But I'd 
probably be locked up for the night anyway. What had I to 
lose? The first voice kept pressing: "Now, now, is the time, 
while they don't expect you to act. Later this place will be 
crowded. Make your getaway now while the coast is clear." 
It was, in fact, clear. An occasional child, a veiled woman, 
or a stray dog passed by. I had seen only two Arabs walk 
into the courtyard, and one had already left. I reasoned that 
I could easily lose myself in the native alleys, but my object 
was to find a way out of the maze and pick up the road to 356 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Jerusalem. Should I risk being trapped and captured in this 
labyrinth, or chance another interrogation tomorrow? 
I sauntered casually into the street, and slipped down one 
of the alleys. In a few minutes I found myself in another 
world—deep behind the native curtain. I walked through 
more twisting alleys until I reac hed the outskirts of Sur Bahir. 
The extraordinary panorama of Jerusalem spread before me. 
It was the hour of sunset, and the Old City wall on the rocky 
height was a magic island floating in space as the rays caught 
the wheat fields, the bluish Dome of the Mosque of Omar, 
the Mount of Olives, and the thousand and one historic 
buildings and shrines. 
I waited until darkness, and then slowly worked my way 
down a rocky slope until I reached a wheat patch. There I 
rested, dozing off at times, until an hour before dawn. My 
plan was to cross this no-man's land while it was still dark 
and reach Jerusalem when traffic was heavy with farmers 
bringing in their produce. I would then lose myself among 
them. 
I rose, chilled through, exercised  my knees to take the kinks 
out, and chewing on a handful of wheat kernels, began walk- 
ing again in what I thought was the direction of Jerusalem. 
I kept going by instinct—I had no other guide; no landmarks 
were visible in the pitch darkness. I grew disturbed because 
the trail I was taking seemed to be leading to higher and 
higher ground. But I had no alternative, except to put as 
much distance as possible between myself and Sur Bahir. 
Not until the first streaks of gray showed on the horizon 
did I realize that I was in totally strange territory. I was lost— 
on a narrow road dug into the side of a scrubby mountain. Not 
even the famous Tower of the Russian Church on the Mount 
of Olives, highest landmark outside the Old City, was visible. 
Before me spread range after range of Judean hills. Below me 
—at the bottom of a chasm some five hundred feet deep— 
was an Arab mud village. Behi nd me an escarpment rose to 
the height of fifty feet. From my left a husky young Arab Bethlehem and Jericho 357 
came down the trail, prodding his laden donkey before him. 
"Sabah il-kher," I said. "Good morning." 
"Sabah il-kher" he replied, and moved on. 
A moment later another Arab came down the road. He 
was an oldish man with close-set eyes, no brighter facially 
than the donkey on which he was mounted. He rode on it 
with his stubby legs astride, his sandaled feet sticking out on 
each side, keeping step with the donkey's hopping stride. 
"Sabah il-kher" he said. 
"Sabah il-kher," I answered. 
A talkative old man, he stopped the animal and jab- 
bered. . . . 
"Ana Inglisi. Mura'asif la ahki Arabie," I said. "Assalamu 
aleikum. Peace be upon you." 
He looked at me a moment, his eyes narrowing into slits. 
"Yahoodi," he yelled, suddenly. "Yahoodi! Jew!" 
"La, la, la. Ana mish Yahoodi. No, no, no. I'm not a Jew. 
Armani. Inglisi. Armenian. English. Ana mish Yahoodi." 
"Anta Yahoodi! Anta Yahoodil You are a Jew! You are a 
Jew!" he screamed. 
I whipped out an identification card, the one issued by the 
Mufti's Arab Higher Committee in Jerusalem. He held it 
upside down. 
It dawned on me that the old man was illiterate. 
"Yahoodi! Yahoodi!'" he screamed like a siren, in a voice 
that carried deep into the mountain crags and the village be- 
low. He jumped off the donkey, snatched at his dagger and, 
still yelling Yahoodi, Yahoodi, roared down at me. 
I took to my heels down the trail. He was easy to out dis- 
tance, but racing toward me was the young Arab I had met a 
minute ago. He was brandishing his dagger above his head; 
the sun's glare made it dazzle like a fiery sword. I felt for a 
moment as though Damocles' blade was about to fall on me. 
There was absolutely no escape!  Below me was the chasm, 
with precipitous sides. I'd roll to the bottom without stop- 
ping. Above me was the escarpment. I'd be overtaken easily 358 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
if I tried to flee. Flee where? The old man would have awak- 
ened the countryside—racing through it like Paul Revere on 
a donkey sounding the alarm against the Yahoodi. A hundred 
daggers would have  sought me out. 
As I ran toward the young man I kept yelling: "Armani, 
Inglisi! Ana mish Yahoodi!'" I girded myself for the inevit- 
able hand-to-hand encounter on the mountaintop, for I had 
no notion of letting myself be stabbed in the throat. I noted 
the Arab's guard was open. I would try to knock him down 
the cliff with a quick right uppercut before the old man 
reached us, then push the latter down and flee. I have no 
idea what made me address the young Arab in English, for 
he was the last man on earth I'd expect to understand me, 
but I screamed just before closing in: "Hold back your knife 
till you've seen my papers!" 
"You are English, or Armenian, which?" my incredulous 
ears heard him say. 
"Read this quick. It's from the Mufti. Read this, and this. 
I'm a friend of all Arabs. I love the Arabs. I'm no Jew." 
The old man was upon us, his dagger all set, the blood lust 
hot in his eyes. At his age he wanted to make sure of getting 
into Allah's heaven and there was no easier way than by kill- 
ing either a Yahoodi or a Gentile. The young Arab grabbed 
him and held him back. The two struggled briefly on the 
mountain trail, a dagger in the hands of each. "Yahoodi! 
Yahoodi! the old man kept yelling, trying to get at me. Up 
the trail two more Arabs came into view and prodded their 
donkeys as they saw the struggle. The young man won out 
in the nick of time, for the newcomers had dismounted and 
were coming down upon us with their daggers out. 
My benefactor began to argue vigorously with the old man; 
he showed my papers to the newcomers, and they, too, agreed 
I was a pro-Arab Christian and that every courtesy should be 
shown me. The old man kept muttering "Yahoodi!" At last 
he was quieted down and put his dagger away. 
"What is your destination?" the young Arab asked. Bethlehem and Jericho 359 
"Jerusalem." 
"You are going in the direction of Bethlehem! Jerusalem 
is the opposite way." 
I accompanied the quartet sheepishly. Turning to the Arab, 
I said: 
"I give this to you in Allah's name for saving me," and 
slipped him a five-dollar bill (representing at least a week's 
wages). "Where did you learn your English?" 
"From the English soldiers. I used to work for the British 
army." 
We walked on for a while, then the Arab pointed to a 
fork in the road. 
"That way is Jerusalem." 
They all wished me peace and a safe journey, except the 
old man whom I had cheated of his place in heaven, for 
which he'd never forgive me. 
Relieved beyond words, I made my way without any fur- 
ther misadventures to the Old City, where I was lucky enough 
to find a Car leaving for Amman, via Jericho. A half hour 
later, after a quick breakfast, I was on my way, comfortably 
seated with an Arab in the rear of the truck, our feet dan- 
gling over the back. Within minutes the jeweled splendor of 
the Holy City was lost behind a succession of barren hills as 
we dipped and twisted our way into the Wilderness. What 
a vista of desolation now spread before us! Utterly denuded 
limestone cliffs rolled undulati ngly before, behind, and about 
us in all directions like the sand dunes of Sahara. The only 
sign of man's touch was the road and the telephone poles 
following the roadbed. I turned to my Arab companion, who 
was jealously hugging a sma ll, well-wrapped package under 
one arm. 
"You guard that as if it was solid gold," I said. 
"It contains passports," he answered. "Captured from the 
Jews." 
"Then you are a courier for the Arab Legion?" 
"Yes, that is why I'm not dressed in uniform." 360 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Halfway to Jericho we drove past Khan Hathrour, a cara- 
vanserai since time immemorial. Tradition places here the 
inn where the Good Samaritan took the traveler who had 
been robbed and beaten by thieves. The road kept dipping, 
and we passed a sign announcing that we were now at sea 
level. Down, down, we continued to coast, squeezing be- 
tween towering rock walls, the region becoming more arid 
and desolate, with buttes and dried pits, barren hills pock- 
marked with boulders and eros ion pockets stretching clear 
to the horizon. As we neared th e level of the Dead Sea, 1,282 
feet below sea level, the lowest body of water in the world, 
the region became a total desert, a vast caldron of dismal, 
tortured, kiln-baked earth. Wh en we hit bottom, the road 
became arrow-straight. We entered the valley of the Dead 
Sea. 
"Someone is following us," I said to the Arab with some 
alarm, as the first of several cars emerged through the dust 
we had raised. 
"Those look like Glubb Pasha and his jeeps. I know them." 
First to catch up was a jeep with a driver and three armed 
Legionnaires. Then came Major-General John Bagot Glubb 
—who had been spending considerable time in Jerusalem— 
in a black American sedan. On impulse I photographed his 
car and the second armed jeep that followed it. It was a relief 
when both passed without stopping. 
Now came the miracle—the miracle of water in the Judean 
wilderness! 
First I saw the irrigation canals, then willow and poplar 
trees, and the beginnings of green orchards; then lush groves 
of banana and fig trees, sugar cane, orange, lemon, palm, and 
date palms. Contrary to the dusty, unappetizing Arab city I 
had expected, Jericho actually was a jewel in the desert wil- 
derness. One of the most ancient and historic cities in the 
world, especially for the Jews, it was the first city they saw 
following their dispersion from Egypt. Joshua conquered it 
by the blowing of trumpets. E lisha cured its bitter waters, Bethlehem and Jericho 361 
making the Dead Sea valley one of the most fertile garden 
spots in the ancient world. Antony made a present of it to 
Cleopatra. Christ came to Jericho frequently, and after His 
baptism in the River Jordan He was "led by the spirit" into 
the desert mountains surrounding the valley, and there 
tempted. By the light of an incomparably wild sunset, I saw 
the Greek monastery perched on the site of the traditional 
grotto of Christ's forty days of fasting. 
In Jericho, I spent the most refreshing night of my sojourn 
in Palestine. My hosts were a Greek and an Armenian, pro- 
prietors of Belle Vue Hotel, a clean, cheerful oasis in the lu- 
nar wilderness of Judea. It served the tenderest shish-kebab 
and pilav in the land. (CHAPTER XX) 
PHILADELPHIA IS IN JORDAN 
 
Dear Mum & All: 
I am still alive & having a wonderful time fight- 
ing the Jews in Palestine. I am joining the Arab 
Legion. As soon as it is possible I will send you my 
address. Your loving son always, 
Sidney 
An English deserter to his mother 
I WAS up at dawn to witness a sunrise that broke like a fire- 
ball over the wild Moab Mountains skirting the Dead Sea, 
setting the valley ablaze with a thousand hues. Over the vast, 
waveless sea, a delicate pink a nd blue-white haze floated like 
an ethereal cloud. With the rising sun, Jericho came to life. 
Sluices of the irrigation canals opened and the waters blessed 
by Elisha—called the Fountain of Elisha—poured through 
the lush gardens and fruit orchards. On the street in front of 
the Belle Vue a donkey brayed plaintively. From somewhere 
another donkey came running, and rubbed its neck against 
that of its mate till it quieted down. This was the first and 
last display of romance between the sexes that I saw in public 
during my six months in the Arab world. When I arrived at 
the marketplace it was already teeming with traffic, pedes- 
trians, and idlers as taxis, tr ucks, and other traffic from Am- 
man and Jerusalem passed throug h. Trucks were arriving with Philadelphia Is in Jordan 363 
scrap lumber, metal, pipes, and assorted machinery from the 
direction of the Dead Sea. I decided to investigate. 
In an Armenian barbershop on Jericho's main street, I met 
a young refugee from Jerusalem named Torkom. Together 
we got into a bus going in the direction of the Dead Sea, then 
walked the remaining distance over the semi-arid baked earth. 
Vast brine evaporation-beds, dazzling white under the sun, 
met the eye in all directions, connected by miles of pipelines. 
Beyond them was the huge plant of Palestine Potash, Ltd. 
(a once highly profitable British corporation owned jointly 
by English and Jewish capital), which converted the fabu- 
lous mineral wealth of the Dead Sea into common salt, bro- 
mides, and chlorides of magnesium, potassium, and calcium. 
Photographing as I went along, I saw, with Torkom, a 
sight that sickened me. The huge plant, stretching over many 
acres, with its generators, tr ansformers, pumps, and a thou- 
sand and one irreplaceable items  of machinery—transported 
at tremendous cost from England and the United States— 
was systematically being looted  and destroyed: building by 
building, machine by machine, board by board. Hundreds of 
Arab scavengers, working with teams of donkeys, mules, and 
trucks, had already stripped aw ay most of the vital working 
parts, and were now tearing at the corrugated tin, pipes, wire, 
boards, and small machines. What they could not take apart 
they smashed with sledge hammers. Instead of utilizing the 
giant plant, or at least expropriating some of the equipment 
for constructive purposes—in a land so desperately in need 
of lumber, glass, ironwork and all else that was in such abun- 
dance here—they were destroying everything, ruthlessly, cold- 
bloodedly, insanely. 
The plant already looked like a miniature Hiroshima, minus 
the ravages of fire. And this wanton destruction was more or 
less officially sanctioned by Tr ans-Jordan officials. A dozen 
Arab Legion guards were on hand to keep law and order 
among the looters. 
Further on, I saw the remains of Hotel Kallia, a noted win- 364 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ter resort on the shores of the Dead Sea. Near by were the 
ruins of the cottages built by th e Palestine Potash Corpora- 
tion to house not only officials, engineers and laborers, but 
scientists and archaeologists. About a mile away I saw what 
was left of Beth Harava, a settlement founded by the Jews, 
who had brought water there to make the desert bloom, so 
that trees and flowers grew 1,300 feet below sea level. 
When the war broke out the isolated colonists packed 
away their belongings, automobiles and all, and set sail during 
the night for the southern shore, site of a smaller potash con- 
cession. I found their homes stripped to the ground, with 
only the framework of a few houses remaining. I walked 
through one ruined home, where sash, doors, and flooring 
were all gone. Unable to rip off the toilet bowl, the Arabs 
had broken it in half. Overwhel med by this destruction all 
about us, Torkom and I walked on to the shores of the Dead 
Sea itself. It was a silent lake, forty-seven miles long and ten 
miles wide. For thousands of years the Jordan had poured 
mineral sediment into it. I found wrecked boats; pilfered 
wreckage dotted the shore as far as the eye could reach. 
Torkom and I silently hitch-hiked back to Jericho on a 
huge truck laden with plunder.  Our scavenger friends drove 
straight to the bazaar and began to sell their loot as junk— 
which was what they had made out of the once valuable 
machinery and equipment. 
PHILADELPHIA IS IN JORDAN 
I HAD no desire to remain in Jericho, because I feared Sur 
Bahir Arabs might already have sent out an alarm for the es- 
caped American. I bade Torkom good-bye and left Jericho 
immediately by taxi for Amman. Soon—with my fingers 
crossed—I arrived at Allenby Bridge over the Jordan, bound- 
ary between Palestine and Trans-Jordan. This sacred river Philadelphia Is in Jordan 365 
cut like a green ribbon through the wilderness, its banks lined 
with willow, acacia, poplar, and tamarisk trees. I had no visa, 
but with the aid of Major Tel's credentials and my Al Misri 
accreditation, I got by. Several hours later my taxi brought 
me down a macadam road to Amman, the capital of Jordan. 
Known as Philadelphia in ancient days, it had now reverted 
to an adaptation of its Biblical name, Rabbath-Ammon. 
With its squat, squarish stone homes resembling minia- 
ture fortresses nestling on the bottom and crawling up the 
sides of the desert valley, its jumble of crooked dusty streets, 
its flat rooftops, minarets, ve iled women, skirted men, and 
odorous bazaars, Amman was typical of most Arab cities. 
But about it was the air of a frontier post, a boom town. The 
taxi let me off at the city square congested with English and 
American vehicles. I was making my way to a hotel when my 
jaw dropped. . . . 
"Hey, Jim!" 
It was Jim Fitzsimmons, the Associated Press photographer 
from the Pantiles. He turned around swiftly, and grinned 
when he saw me. 
"Carlson! When did you get here?" 
As we walked together down King Faisal street, the main 
thoroughfare, Jim told me his story. "Right after you disap- 
peared, we figured you had made the Arab side because your 
stuff was gone. Hell, if you did it, we could, too! Most of the 
boys decided to leave, so we got the Red Cross to take us 
over to the Arabs. We were supposed to report to the com- 
mander in Jerusalem but never did. I got a ride here with Dan 
de Luce. Bob Hecox and I are the only ones left in Amman. 
The rest skipped." 
"Where to?" 
"Cyprus. They chartered a private plane and scrammed 
without telling Amman officials. They are sore as hell now. 
They want Bob and me to get out quick." 
"But why? They should be friendly to Americans here. 
Jordan is practically a British colony." 366 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Aw, these Arabs think every newspaperman is a spy." 
We walked on to the Philadelphi a Hotel, finest in Jordan. 
It was so crowded, however, that  I was forced to share a room 
with four strangers in a room  in the annex. The place was 
clean, and I was to find the food good. My roommates were 
an odd assortment. One was Ar ab. Another claimed to be 
Spanish, the third Belgian, the fourth said he was English 
but I guessed he was a Slav. I locked my suitcase securely, 
after which I had supper, then went to an outdoor movie 
built on the roof of one of the city's main buildings. We sat 
on squat bulrush chairs, with the stars twinkling overhead. 
The audience was all male. Mild necking and hand-holding 
went on around me between husky dark-skinned young men, 
their khaffiyas flowing down their necks like veils. 
The film was an Egyptian tale about a Bedouin triangle in 
which a desert sheikh contrived to kidnap the fiancee of an- 
other sheikh the night before the wedding. The lover was 
killed and the girl murdered by her father for letting herself 
be kidnapped, and presumably kissed. As for the ending, no- 
body lived happily ever after. Thus Arab justice triumphed— 
for there is no greater sin in the lexicon of Arab morals than 
feminine unchastity. No one cares about the morals of the 
male. 
Except for three movie houses showing second-rate Ameri- 
can, and first-rate British and Egyptian films, night life in 
Amman was nonexistent. Amman was probably the only 
Arab capital that had not fallen victim to such iniquities as 
night-clubs, cabarets, and brothels. The city took pride in its 
purity, but was apparently unconcerned about homosexuality. 
With public dancing prohibited (save at British-sponsored 
affairs attended by the foreign set) and concerts, plays, lec- 
tures, or any other type of cultural life lacking, the young 
men of Amman could only spend their evenings playing 
backgammon, attending the cinema, or sitting at a sidewalk 
cafe listening to the blaring radio. They went to bed early 
and were up at five a.m. Most s hops opened at six. It was said Philadelphia Is in Jordan 367 
that the king was at his desk even before that hour and re- 
ceived callers as early as six o'clock in the morning. 
After retiring in the company of my four strange room- 
mates, I was awakened suddenly by  the racket of anti-aircraft 
guns and the muffled thud of falling bombs. It was past four 
a.m. My companions were already up, chattering excitedly. 
Jumping into my trousers, I ran out. The grounds were filled 
with men and women gaping at the skies—witnesses to the 
first air raid in history upon this ancient city. We heard the 
drone of Israeli planes circling overhead, dropping bombs, 
which must have been small because they caused no extraor- 
dinary noise, certainly nothing  compared to what the Arab 
Legion had rained upon the New City. The Israeli bombs 
were landing somewhere on the rim of the canyon wall around 
Amman. Sleepy, I went back to bed. 
FACING ARAB MUSIC 
THE Israeli raid had caught napping not only the Arab Le- 
gion, but also the huge Britis h Royal Air Force base main- 
tained a few miles away for just  such emergencies. The effect 
of the raid was electrifying; it struck terror into the hearts of 
the people of Jordan. Here w as undeniable evidence that the 
Jew was not only fighting back against the Legion, but, by 
bombing Glubb Pasha's headquarters, now dared to defy the 
combined might of the British and the Arabs. The bombing 
was an overwhelming psychological victory for Israel. 
Shortly after noon I left my room and passed a long, fully 
equipped caravan of Iraqi soldiers on their way to fight Is- 
rael. Then I ran into Jim and Bob. 
''Haven't the police looked you up?" Jim asked. 
"Not yet." 
"They will. They've told us to get out today. We're leav- 
ing." 368 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
It was agreed that the two Israeli planes had spent a great 
deal of time circling the city, apparently contemptuous of 
its defenses. It was also a ffirmed that King Abdullah had 
become so enraged that he himself tried to bring them down 
with his rifle. The bombs, I learned, had fallen on scattered 
areas and killed six Arabs. Wh ether through sheer luck or 
design, one bomb had damaged the home of General Abdul 
Qader Pasha, Arab chief of the Legion. This had given rise 
to all kinds of wild rumors. Witnesses had allegedly seen 
flares and flashlight signals suggesting fifth-column conspir- 
acy, and scores of both Arabs and non-Arabs, particularly 
refugees, were being rounded up by the police. Panic was 
growing. It was time for me to do something about my own 
security. I went to the Jordan  Press office to get my accred- 
itation as a correspondent, and was brought before the mili- 
tary censor. 
"I'm one of the American correspondents from Jerusalem. 
I arrived yesterday afternoon." 
"Where were you all this time? Why didn't you report 
with the others?" 
"I was in the Old City with Major Tel. He has given me 
this accreditation. . . . I'm Armenian by birth. I'm on the 
side of the Arabs and bless Melik [King] Abdullah every day 
for his kindness toward the Armenians." 
"What do you know of Robert Hecox?" he suddenly asked. 
"Nothing much. He seems to be a good fellow." 
"What do you know of his wife?" 
"I didn't even know he was married," I said truthfully. 
"Go see Hamid Bey Farhan," he growled. 
Farhan was Chief Censor, a short, intense British-trained 
Intelligence officer. I seized the initiative, laid down my cre- 
dentials, emphasizing that I was an accredited correspondent 
for Al Misri, and asked for Jordan accreditation. 
"Did you cross with the other Americans through the Red 
Cross?" Philadelphia Is in Jordan 369 
"Yes," I said, lying. I risked it in the hope that he would 
have no reason to check with the authorities at Sur Bahir, or 
with Major Tel in Jerusalem. 
"Then why wasn't your name reported with the others?" 
"My name is Armenian. Americans always have difficulty 
pronouncing it. They're too lazy to remember, so they forget." 
"I will call Fitzsimmons and check on your story." 
With this Farhan leaned over to telephone the Philadel- 
phia Hotel. He hung on for more than five minutes, in the 
meanwhile saying nothing, scrutinizing me sharply and re- 
studying my credentials. 
"Fitzsimmons and Hecox have already left for Syria," he 
announced, hanging up. "I shall have to believe your story." 
"It is the truth," I said. 
"What do you know of Robert Hecox's wife?"1 
"Nothing," I repeated. "I didn't know he was married." 
"I will have to check up on  you through other sources," 
Farhan snapped.  "In  the meanwhile, you must not leave 
Amman. I want you to report to me once daily until we have 
cleared you." 
"Yes, sir." 
There was nothing else for me to say. I was in no mood— 
at this point—to attempt taking French leave here, as I had 
at Sur Bahir. 
AMMAN—TODAY AND YESTERDAY 
AN AIR-RAID shelter was being dug on one side of the 
town square. It consisted of a shallow tunnel under the street, 
with both sides open; at most it could not hold more than 
100 persons; nor could it provide any protection whatever 
1 Curious to know the reason for the interest in Bob's wife. I ascer- 
tained later that they thought she was Jewish. 370 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
against direct hits or cave-ins. Further on, behind a bank, 
workers were digging another hole that would be cement- 
lined for the storage of bank funds and securities. 
Jordan had no streetcars, horse-drawn or otherwise, less 
than three hundred miles of railroads, and only 360 miles of 
roads. And it was probably the only Arab State that had not 
a single Jew. Jews, by an unwritten law, were forbidden to 
take up residence. This explaine d in part Jordan's commercial 
and cultural lethargy. The King proved kind to the Arme- 
nians, many of whom settled in Jordan after fleeing from 
Palestine. Displaying energy and resourcefulness, they had 
already achieved some prominence in many fields of endeavor, 
adding materially to Jordan's progress. 
Unlike the people of Cairo—many of whom were hostile 
and suspicious—I found the Arabs in Amman even-tempered 
and friendly. Even the fiercest-looking, sun-bleached Bedouin, 
armed with rifle, cartridge belt, and daggers, was someone 
with whom you could sit down and enjoy a glass of chai. One 
did not see constant brawls, bully ing of children, or beggars 
without number, as in Cairo. 
Amman was a new city in an ancient setting. Directly op- 
posite the Philadelphia Hotel were the ruins of a huge Ro- 
man amphitheater, dating from the Roman occupation in 
A.D. 90. I walked from tier to tier, through the vaults under- 
neath the stone theater, then in  the elliptical arena itself. 
They were all in shabby condition, now repository for filth 
and human refuse. The outlines of temples, palaces, and 
classic columns were barely distinguishable amid the rubble. 
Amman officials boasted of these antiquities, but treated them 
as garbage dumps. 
When conquered in A.D. 650 by Arabic hordes, Amman 
entered a period of decline inte nsified later by Turkish con- 
quest, so that in Amman as in other Arab capitals I heard the 
phrase: "Wherever the Turk has walked there the grass has 
stopped growing." Depopulation, extensive soil erosion, de- 
forestation, and banditry continued unchecked until Trans- Philadelphia Is in Jordan 371 
Jordan became a British mandate in 1920. Under British rule, 
Jordan had made phenomenal progress—contrasted to that 
under Turkish rule—and the fiercely independent Bedouins, 
who comprised more than half the population, were brought 
into line under Abdullah, crowned king in 1947. 
But Jordan still was backward. The vast majority of the 
native population of four hundr ed thousand was illiterate. 
The country's first Secondary College (corresponding to our 
preparatory school) had just been completed, and boasted a 
mere two hundred students. The hand of the imperial ruler 
lay heavy on Jordan, the vassal State. Allowed to trade only 
with sterling-area countries, it couldn't import or export a 
product—or make a political or military move—without the 
approval of His Majesty's Colonial Office. It had either to 
accept British goods or have no goods at all. But as one Jor- 
dan Arab told me: 
"We have mineral resources, but because we do not have 
money to exploit them, we are poor. We have no Nile valley 
in which to raise cotton. We  have no industries, no skilled 
workers. It's better to have England with us than against us. 
Better to receive a few million pounds a year than nothing 
at all.2 
"How long do you expect England to rule your country?" 
"England will never leave the Middle East. She has too 
many interests between Persia and Gibraltar. If she loses her 
holdings in the Middle East, she'll become bankrupt and sink 
from the international picture." 
I walked to the headquarters of the Arab Legion, located 
in a rugged stone building on a hill off the main street. In 
the semidarkened hallway I saw three doors, marked in Eng- 
lish, as follows: R. J. C. Broadhurst—1/C Administrator; 
J. G. Glubb Pasha—OC Arab Legion; Emir Luva, Abdul 
Qader Pasha. 
2 British subsidies to the Arab Legion are approximately £3,000,000 an- 
nually, in addition to grants-in-aid, as needed, to uphold the economy of the 
country. 372 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Entering a stuffy little office, I talked to Glubb Pasha's 
secretary, who said to me in a businesslike manner: "If Glubb 
Pasha is not busy you may interview him now." 
The Legion chief received me with a cordial smile in a 
small room with a battered desk, stiff-backed chair, and two 
telephones. A short, personable-appearing man with blond 
hair and soft blue eyes, Glubb wore a mustache and a per- 
manent smile that was caused by the removal of part of his 
jawbone following an injury. Arabs called him Abou Hunaik, 
Father of the Little Chin. Glubb was toying with his string 
of amber beads, a habit of twenty-seven years among the 
Arabs. He not only spoke the language fluently, but had also 
endeared himself to the Arabs by squatting at meals and dip- 
ping greasy fingers into a communal dish of roast lamb buried 
in a mound of rice with an icing of yoghourt, the Jordanian 
national dish called mausaf. It was said that whenever con- 
ferring with Bedouins, Glubb—like Lawrence of Arabia— 
would even scratch away at imag inary lice in order to establish 
a common bond. But if I had any notion that Abou Hunaik 
would talk, I lost it very soon. Charming and soft-spoken, 
Glubb absolutely refused to answer questions. 
"I am just an employee of His Majesty, King Abdullah. He 
has engaged me to organize the Arab Legion as he might have 
engaged you to do a book on Trans-Jordan." 
Though I visited him again later, he refused to go beyond 
this incredibly simplified version of his vital role in the com- 
plicated drama of Middle East politics. There was nothing for 
me to do but forget my frustration and walk into the nearest 
restaurant for dinner. 
IN ARABIA DO AS THE ARABS DO 
IT WAS a small place, heavy with kitchen odors. I sat op- 
posite an Arab who was busy dipping pieces of bread in the Philadelphia Is in Jordan 373 
dish before him, and eating with great gusto, to the accom- 
paniment of crunching and swishing sounds. Looking and 
listening to him eat made me more hungry. He was a young, 
clean-cut Arab in a striped blue shirt open at the neck. 
"What are you eating?" I asked. 
"Tafaddal, tafaddal," he offere d. ''Please, help yourself." 
To refuse would be an unforgiv able breach of courtesy, so I 
reached over, tore off a piece of his bread, shaped it to fit 
snugly into a groove of my four fingers, dipped it in his dish 
and brought it to my mouth. The Arab looked at me ex- 
pectantly. If the dish had tasted  like a boiled dishrag, courtesy 
demanded that I speak of it favorably. Happily, the assortment 
of baked vegetables and meat in casserole was delicious. 
"Keif la-ayt. How is it?" the Arab asked. 
"Lazis." I answered. "Excellent." 
"Tafaddal, tafaddal," he offered. 
I had no choice but to break more of his bread and help 
myself to his meal until the waiter came and I ordered the 
national dish, mausaf. 
"Tafaddal, tafaddal," my host offered again. 
I indicated that he wouldn't have enough to eat if I shared 
his meal. He wouldn't hear of it. He put aside the glasses of 
water and placed his plate in the center for my convenience. 
We ate in silence, except fo r sluicing noises as the morsels 
were sucked into the mouth to prevent the juices from drip- 
ping down our chins. By the time the waiter arrived with my 
food, the casserole was all gone. The waiter lifted the empty 
dish and put mine down. 
"Tafaddal, tafaddal" 1 said to my former host. 
"La, mamnunak, no, thank you," he answered, as expected 
of him. Arab manners demand that one refuse the offering the 
first time so as not to be considered greedy. At the second 
offering, however, he must accept or insult his host. 
"Tafaddal, tafaddal." I said again, as expected of me. 
My guest needed no further coaxing. Seizing a loaf of kmaj, 
he tore it neatly into halves, then quarters, then eighths, and 374 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
began his assault on my plate of mausaf. First he dug into a 
chunk of meat, placing it on the bottom of the bread, which 
he had shaped like a pyramid; th en he stuffed the rest of the 
bread with rice, and saturated the mixture with sauce and 
yoghourt. With a quick turn of the wrist and an upward mo- 
tion of the hand, my friend brought the loaded pyramid to 
his mouth, tilting his head slightly to let the juices drop in 
first, quickly followed by the solid food. After this he licked 
his lips to clear them and began to prepare another mouthful. 
Etiquette also demanded that the guest match his host's 
pace and not outstrip him in consumption, lest he be con- 
sidered hoggish. Less expert at the art than my guest, I urged 
him from time to time—"Tafaddal, tafaddal"—to my loss 
but to his elation, for he was a hearty cater. Between us we 
made short work of the heaped plate, smacked our lips and 
belched liberally and loudly. It  was indeed a satisfying meal! 
I ordered pastry, but my friend insisted on paying for it. I re- 
fused. The unwritten code of Arab etiquette demanded that 
at this point a friendly fight en sue, and one did, according to 
Allah's custom, as we bickered back and forth over who should 
pay for the sweets. I cut the play short by suggesting: 
"If you will let me pay for the coffee, I'll let you pay for 
the baklawa," 
"Tayyib! Very good!" 
"And for Allah's sake I will leave something for the waiter." 
"Anta rajul tayyib. You are a good man," my host said. "El 
Amrikan nas taycebeen. Americans are a kind people." 
After the dessert we sipped our coffee noisily (the noises 
are considered a sign of pleasure) and went together to the 
water tap to wash. My anonymous  friend insisted I wash first 
while he held the towel. I waited till he had finished and 
turned over the community towel to him. We had broken 
bread in the best Arab tradition, and I had made a convert 
to my country. I felt satisfied. At the doorway we parted com- 
pany. Putting his right hand to his heart my Arab friend said: Philadelphia Is in Jordan 375 
"Fiemen el lah, God be with you." 
Putting my right hand over my own heart, I answered: 
"Allah ma'ak. And God be with you." 
LAST DAYS IN AMMAN 
IT WAS dark when I emerged. The bazaars had already 
closed, but the odor of spices and oils was still as strong as 
on a waterfront. The dust had settled. A cooling breeze made 
the evening pleasant as I walked  through the side streets. 
Stars appeared one by one as th e twilight deepened into night 
and city noises gradually ceased. Amman was blacked out. In 
the dark I walked toward th e Philadelphia Hotel, opposite 
which the ancient Roman theat er was outlined in the dim 
starlight. I continued to walk, finding peace in this motion. 
Now that the excitement of Jerusalem was over, I found my- 
self homesick—for my real friends, for an American movie, ice 
cream, a drive in my car. How far away they seemed. . . . 
A siren wail pierced the night and reverberated through the 
valley. I ran into a crowded cafe, after me a man and his wife, 
then another woman. Though it was pitch dark, the women 
kept on their dark veils, groping their way by feeling the walls, 
fearing that a match would expose their faces. The all-clear 
signal sounded in a half hour, and we left the coffee house. 
. . . British radar, anti-aircraft  guns, and patrol planes watched 
the skies through the night, and we slept peacefully in the 
Philadelphia Hotel. 
The next day I met a group of English deserters who were 
living in the Royal Air Force barracks on Amman's outskirts. 
I knew most of them from Jerusalem, and took their pictures. 
One of the boys—I prefer to identify him only as Sidney— 
gave me a message to take to his parents in Birmingham if I 
should ever get back to England: 376 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Dear Mum & All: 
I am still alive & having a wonderful time fighting the Jews 
in Palestine. I am joining the Arab Legion. As soon as it is 
possible I will send you my address. Your loving son always, 
Sidney 
In the afternoon I reported to Farhan Bey. Had I been 
cleared yet? 
"We are still investigating your background. Report again 
tomorrow." 
I reported the next day, with the same results. It was my 
fourth day in Amman. I knew it might take a week or even a 
month to complete a report on me. Meanwhile, anything 
might happen to get me deeper in hot water. I made my plans 
quietly. The next afternoon I reported to Farhan Bey, as 
usual. By the time I had left his office I knew what I would 
do. Without informing anybody, I would simply leave for 
Damascus, 125 miles away, by ta xi. By the time Farhan Bey 
learned I had left, I would be safely out of the country, and in 
Syria—I hoped. 
At dawn I checked out of the Philadelphia and went di- 
rectly to the bus depot on Amman's Faisal street. The first 
taxi for Damascus was scheduled to leave at eight o'clock— 
almost two hours later—if at least four passengers were on 
hand. I paid my fare, put my luggage into the cab's trunk, and 
waited at the so-called terminal. It had just room enough for 
a few Arabs and their luggage. Passengers usually marked time 
on the sidewalk, where I wanted least to be seen. 
"I have a bad leg and cannot stand long," I said to the 
driver, limping for his benefit. "I will be in that restaurant. 
Come for me just before you start. I will have your baksheesh 
ready." 
I sat inconspicuously in the corner of the restaurant, drink- 
ing tea. Periodically I slipped to the door and looked out. The 
cab was still there. I dreaded the thought of being spotted 
now—in the act of trying to leave—by Farhan Bey's agents. Philadelphia Is in Jordan 377 
That I had so far kept out of trouble was due mainly to the 
Arab national curses: laxity, gullib ility, the love of baksheesh. 
On the other hand, might not Farhan Bey strike suddenly? 
Perhaps he had waited for just this moment—when all my 
belongings were together so I'd be caught with my precious 
photographs and notes. 
I took another quick look at the cab. The driver was still 
hawking for customers. "Sham! Sham! Yallah ala Sham! Da- 
mascus! Damascus! Going to Damascus!" He had one more 
passenger and needed two more to make the trip pay. Suffer- 
ing the tortures of the damned, I fortified myself with glass 
after glass of tea. It was past eight o'clock when I glanced out 
again. The driver now had three passengers, two in the back, 
one at his side. I saw him closing the trunk. Would he come 
over for me—or drive off with my property? I waited. I was 
on the verge of running over when I saw him heading for the 
restaurant. I had his baksheesh waiting. I raced to the cab 
and got in quickly. 
"Ahh, your foot. You are not now lame," the driver ob- 
served. 
"The rest and the tea did me good. I feel much better." 
A lump was in my throat—as Mother would say when 
painfully anxious—until we were well out of Amman. The 
lump eased a bit as the taxi sp ed in a northeasterly direction 
over an excellent macadam road toward Damascus. We came 
to Mafrak, on whose desert outskirts the Arab Legion kept 
prisoner the Old City defenders. Near by were also thousands 
of Iraqi troops held in reser ve for Abdullah's ambitions in 
Palestine. Extensive British RAF and Arab Legion barracks 
were sprawled out. One final hur dle remained—the last fron- 
tier checkpost in Jordan. We alighted from the cab and went 
into a building. The treatment was courteous but thorough. 
"Your passport shows no entry visa into Jordan. How did 
you enter?" 
"Through the International Red Cross with the approval of 
Jordan officials." 378 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
It was vague, of course, but I had no desire to be specific 
unless forced. 
"Nothing is marked down on your passport. Nor do you 
have a visa for Syria. If the Syrians send you back to us, we 
won't be able to accept you because you have no Jordan 
visa. . . ." 
"I will then join your Bedouins and become a wandering 
American,! I said jokingly. 
"Oh, well, never mind." After a moment's hesitation, the 
official added: "I hope you Americans will change your atti- 
tude on Zionism." 
"I promise you that as a journalist I will do my best." 
With this I was released. I couldn't get back to the taxi 
fast enough. The pole across the roadway was raised; we were 
soon whisked over the Jordan frontier into Syria. (CHAPTER XXI) 
DAMASCUS: JEWEL OF THE ORIENT 
"A toast to the memory of the great German 
fuehrer" Fadhil Bey said. 
"Heil Hitler!" 
"May he come to rule again!" 
"Heil Hitler!" 
My head reeled. Where was I—in Berlin? What 
year was this—1938? 
LATE in the afternoon our taxi rolled into the outskirts of 
Damascus, the oldest continuously  inhabited city in the world. 
I had expected to find another Cairo—a repository of filth, 
flies, and grime. To my deli ght, Damascus was far different. 
It was 2,200 feet above sea level, cradled by mountains, cooled 
by an invigorating climate and blessed by a clear fresh river 
flowing in a canal through the center of the city. 
As the taxi drove down the broad boulevard I saw a sight I 
had never seen in Cairo: a peasant was washing his donkey, 
which stood docile, knee-deep in water, having its sides and 
underbelly brushed clean. Farther on, along the edges of an 
irrigation ditch, a half dozen Moslem women in flowing gar- 
ments and veils were sitting with their backs to the street and 
cooling their bare feet in the waters. I chose an inconspicuous 
hotel, a clean native hostelry called the Amawi, in the heart 
of the restaurant district, adj acent to the bazaars. Opposite it 380 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
was a mosque. I had not eaten since early morning and the 
day had been particularly nerve-wracking. I stoked away a de- 
licious supper, took a bath—my first real hot bath since my 
stay at the Jerusalem YMCA, weeks before—and went to 
sleep. I slept till noon of the following day. Then I had an- 
other hot bath, another full meal, and was fortified for what- 
ever kismet had in store. 
JEWEL OF THE ORIENT 
WHAT a rich treasury of culture was represented in Da- 
mascus, the fourth holy city of Islam after Mecca, Medina, 
and Jerusalem! At one time it ranked next to Jerusalem as a 
center of Christian missionary zeal—here Paul had been con- 
verted—but it was now a city of mosques and minarets, hun- 
dreds of them rising above the flat rooftops. Through the long 
centuries it had been conquere d and reconquered, ravaged, 
burned, and looted time and again. So ancient was it that Abra- 
ham, as recorded in Genesis, waged war against the abductors 
of Lot and chased them "unto Hobah, which is on the left 
hand of Damascus." This was th e fabulous city in which the 
reputed tomb of John the Baptist was housed beneath the 
dome of a giant mosque; down one of its minarets—called 
Jesus Minaret—Moslems believed Christ would descend on 
Doomsday. 
Sightseeing was a compulsion I could not resist. I took an 
Armenian guide with me. His only request was that I keep 
him plied with arak, the brandylike liquor, every hour on the 
hour, with a chaser of more arak. 
"But it's too hot for arak," I observed, 
"Arak keeps me cool in summer, and warm in winter," he 
remarked sagely, and then adde d: "I will take you first to a 
harem—a real harem—without women." 
We walked over cobblestone str eets, tortuously twisting and Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 38,1 
winding. Native life indescribable in variety and color spread 
before us with every step. We entered Azem Palace—the 
governor's abode in earlier days—and found ourselves in a 
huge courtyard surrounded by magnificent mosaics, pools, 
trees, and flowers. This was the haremlik reserved for the 
pasha's family. To the left we re the women's quarters, where 
dozens of wives and concubines had whetted the appetite of 
their lecherous master and the princes of his household. We 
stepped into the baths, a series of low chambers inlaid with 
stone—with windows high up, connected with the pasha's 
chambers. 
"In this room," my guide said, "they refreshed themselves 
with cool drinks and arak. And in this"—we had stepped into 
a larger room that I visualized with lush carpets, divans, pil- 
lows—"they played. That is to  say, the pasha and the princes 
made sport with concubines of the harem, and tore the veils 
from the dancing girls. ... A few men, among many women 
without veils! What a life that must have been, with nothing 
to do but eat, drink, and make sport—then start all over 
again. Eh, I'm not young, but it makes my blood boil just to 
think of it. . . . Come my friend, I'm getting warm. It's 
time for another arak." 
This time I joined him. 
We walked to Derwishieh street. At one time Damascus 
flourished with Dervish fraternities. They were an extraordi- 
nary and mystic sect, one group of which, the Dancing 
Dervishes, whirled round and round within a railed inclosure 
in a mosque to the accompaniment of a slow, weird chant, and 
the beat of Oriental music. Their eyes closed, their arms 
stretched stiffly outward like wi ngs, the tempo of their whirl- 
ing increased till it became a cataleptic fit, after which the 
"dancers" sank in utter exhaustion. 
"There were also the Howling Dervishes," the Armenian 
put in. "When the dancing had reached a certain pitch they 
began to howl like human sirens. They would cut themselves 
with knives. They would eat live coals and crunch jagged 382 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
pieces of glass. They handled hot irons and devoured live 
snakes." 
"Is it the heat or the arak that is making you talk nonsense?" 
I asked, 
"Look, my friend, I'm a student of these matters. I'm speak- 
ing the truth. The more violent forms of the order have been 
repressed, but during the Feast of the Ramadan the Dancing 
Dervishes perform their rituals, especially in Aleppo where 
their leader, the Great Tshelebi, has his headquarters." The 
Armenian seized my arm violently. "You are in luck. Here 
comes a member of the order. Look. . . ." 
Coming toward us was a husky, well-muscled man with a 
thick neck and a large round face. He wore an unusual hat. 
It was a fez at least three times the ordinary height of 
the red Moslem headdress, and it was not red, but brownish 
gray. 
"Assalamu aleikum," the Dervish greeted. 
"Wa aleikum salam," the Armenian responded. Turning to 
me, he added: "I know him and have seen him dance. He 
whirls like a giant top." 
I found the Syrians neat, clean, highly artistic. Many were 
descendants of Christians, Jews, Romans, Jacobites, and others 
who were forcefully converted and had long since inter- 
mingled with the conquering Arab and Turk. 
The next day I went shopping—always an exciting adven- 
ture in the Orient, but one that can be ruinous to the pocket- 
book of an American tourist. Mo st famous of the souks, ba- 
zaars, was the Hamidieh, a long  vaultlike street lined with 
countless small shops protected by corrugated metal sheeting 
high above the street level. Here  were souks for jewelry, needle- 
work, leatherwork, perfumes, spices and herbs, copperware, 
baked goods, tinware, glassware, wholesale cloth, rugs, tapes- 
tries, haberdashery—a pageantry of color, crafts, and smells 
without parallel in the world! I bought heavy damask ties, a 
miniature narghileh, a khaffiya of unusually fine weave, red Damascus: Jewel of  the Orient 383 
slippers, a sash, and a princely gallabiya that the tailor claimed 
he had just finished for a Syrian pasha. 
Storing my souvenirs at the Amawi, I took a bus to our 
consulate. Its distance from the heart of the Syrian capital im- 
pressed me as being symbolic of the distance I felt our officials 
maintained from the soul of Syria. They were trying hard to 
do a thorough job of understanding the Arab and fostering 
good will, but they were limited by many handicaps: (a) they 
were Anglo-Saxons from far-off America; (b) they were es- 
sentially transients in the land; (c) they counted a great deal 
on local Syrians for data and interpretation—and every Syrian 
had his own axe to grind. Objective reporting is unknown 
among the highly emotional and partisan Arabs. The Ameri- 
cans I met were extremely friendly and hospitable. But I could 
not help feeling that officially we were far removed from the 
realities of Arab life and Arab psychology—a feeling that I 
found equally applicable to our legations all over the Middle 
East. 
Our American officials' general anti-Zionist, pro-Arab at- 
titude that I met in the Arab world impressed me as not a 
conviction arrived at intellectually, but a matter of policy dic- 
tated by State Department dogma, resulting among other 
things from the fact that we had invested enormously in Mid- 
dle East properties and depended on the good will of the Arab 
world for forty per cent of our oil. I felt that if substantial de- 
posits were discovered in the Ne gev our State Department at- 
titude would be modified overnight. 
THE WOMAN WHO WORE NO VEIL 
MY ARMENIAN friend and guide had dropped a hint the 
day before, when I asked him about the subject, that he knew 
of a beautiful Iraqi woman—a radical leader named Victoria 
Naasan "who wears no veil." The only clue he could give me 
was that she usually dined at a restaurant just off Damascus's 384 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Broadway, Hedjaz street. I had already eaten there and had 
made the acquaintance of the proprietor by going into his 
kitchen and congratulating him on its tidiness. I went there 
again for supper hoping to find the Iraqi beauty. But all I saw 
were male customers, and an old woman, obviously a visitor, 
dining with an old man. I went back into the kitchen. 
"Ahlen wa sahlen," the proprietor said. The right pupil of 
his eye was brown, the left distinctly blue. 
Calling him aside, I assumed an all-knowing look and said 
in Turkish: "As you know, I'm an Armenian from America. I 
have just come from Baghdad wh ere I was told to contact 
Victoria Naasan immediately." 
The proprietor's face changed. "I do not know her." 
"My friend, I have to be even more careful than you," I 
said with just the proper suggestion of mystery. "Where is 
Victoria?" 
"I have not seen her in three days. Maybe she has been ar- 
rested. I don't know. I swear by Mohammed's beard I'm ig- 
norant of her whereabouts." 
"Who else would know of her?" 
"Go see Bayram Volga. He owns the pastry shop opposite 
the Parliament. You must tell him you are coming at the di- 
rection of Abdou." 
It was a delectable shop, and I enjoyed the sweets im- 
mensely, praising them so much that Bayram Volga waited on 
me personally for the second and third servings. 
"Bayram Volga, I wish to speak with you outside," I said 
suddenly. 
Startled, he stepped into the street. 
"Abdou has sent me to you. He has not seen Victoria 
Naasan in three days, and is worried. So am I. I have just 
come from Baghdad with instructions to see her." 
"What instructions?" 
"Very confidential matters which I can only communicate 
to her." 
"Who are you?" Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 385 
"A friend of her friends in Baghdad, and a friend of her 
friends in America. Our comradeship extends around the 
world." 
Bayram Volga proved stubborn and suspicious, but I finally 
persuaded him that I was trustworthy. He told me where she 
lived. By nine o'clock that night I located an attractive two- 
story house surrounded by an iron fence. The street itself was 
dark. I made sure the house was not watched, then rang the 
bell. I rang again, and once again with no response. Had I 
been sent on a wild-goose chase? Something in me told me not 
to give up. I walked casually up the block toward the street- 
light on the corner, then down again on the other side, lurking 
in the shadows to kill the next half hour. Suddenly, I saw a 
woman coming up the other side of the street. I moved deep 
into the shadow of a doorway and watched her disappear into 
the house. Ten minutes later I rang the bell again. This time 
it was answered. 
I faced a tall woman in her middle twenties, with ravishing 
almond-shaped eyes and light sk in, in a French dress with a 
pronounced V-neck within which her plumpness was com- 
pressed arrestingly. Naturally wavy hair flowed down over her 
shoulders. Somehow I visualized that the maidens in the 
Arabian Nights must have looked somewhat like Victoria 
Naasan. 
"You are Victoria Naasan?" I said. "Bayram Volga and 
Abdou have sent me." 
"Come in please, quickly," she said, in excellent English. 
It was strange to find myself alone with an attractive Mos- 
lem girl. This had never happe ned during all the months of 
my stay in the Arab countries. 
"You seem to be alone here?" I said. 
"Yes. I live with a Russian family, but they are away in 
Beirut now." 
"In Cairo," I said, "I spoke with many who are working 
hard." I mentioned Nabaoui, and the Communist newspaper 
El Gamaheer. 386 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Ah, yes!" exclaimed Victoria Naasan, brightening. "It is 
an excellent little paper. I know of it." 
I went on to ask: "You are not afraid here—of the police, 
I mean?" 
She shrugged her shoulders. "One learns to live with fear," 
she said, with a little smile. "I am sure that they know I'm here 
but for the time being, at least, they let me alone. They don't 
think women can organize. The police laugh at us. They have 
driven all the men underground, so the women have taken 
their place." 
"Are you very active?" 
"The entire movement is quiet now. We do little openly at 
the moment. Conditions are becoming worse every day. The 
war in Palestine has hurt trade, and the merchant class is un- 
happy. Thousands of refugees ha ve arrived, and they are un- 
happy. The government is corrupt as well as bankrupt. There 
is much dissatisfaction in Syria.  We are working. In the mean- 
while, we are cultivating valuable friends." 
"Are the comrades from Russia giving any direct help?" I 
asked. 
"Russia is our great inspiration, though I myself have no 
direct connection with non-Arabs. There is much preliminary 
work to be done, but ultimately we will find leadership among 
the Arabs. We do not need Russia." 
I asked her if she worked with men. 
"No," she said. "I have not worked with them because it is 
haram [a term signifying "forbidden"] for a woman here to 
be seen with them. I'm organizing women in ways which do 
not arouse the suspicion of the police. The Moslem woman 
desperately needs emancipation. Sh e is a slave of the man, and 
has no part whatever in managing her own affairs. The women 
listen to me, and some are already doing effective work among 
their friends." 
"How did you become interested in the movement?" I 
asked. 
"I saw the conditions of the people in my native city of Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 387 
Basra. Later, I saw even worse conditions all over Iraq. My 
people had no shoes, no clothing, no food. They were sick all 
the time. They earned just enough to keep from dying on the 
streets. I love my people. Marxism is the only answer." 
I nodded. There was little else I could do or say under the 
circumstances. With the radical I was a radical; with the Com- 
munist I was pro-Communist; with the Fascist, pro-Fascist; 
with the anti-Zionist, anti-Jewish. All these and many other 
roles I had assumed to survive. 
THE WOMAN IN BLACK—SYMBOL OF ISLAM 
ONE day I gained an additional insight into the Moslem 
social code. My informant was a neatly dressed university 
graduate, twenty-six years of age, whom I shall call Sabaa. He 
was a member of the Arabic Club, whose avowed pro-German 
leader later caused me some very uncomfortable moments. I 
sat with Sabaa at a sidewalk cafe on Hedjaz avenue. 
"Look at that," he said, suddenly, pointing to a woman all 
in black: black headdress, heavy black veil, black cotton stock- 
ings, black shoes. The hem of a black slip showed. "Doesn't 
she look like a ghost in black?"  he exclaimed scornfully. 
I had just met him and I was cautious: "Why do you con- 
demn your own customs?" 
"We must change our mentality," Sabaa said, in a bitter 
voice. "Our backwardness is a greater curse to us than Zionism. 
This woman we saw is a prisoner of custom. She does not live 
in this world. She does not pa rticipate in the activities of 
civilized society. She is always at home. The religious fanatics 
want to keep her there always. They do not even want her to 
go to the cinema because it is a Western invention and there- 
fore might corrupt her. That woman in black is a symbol of 
our society." 
"I have heard many young Egyptians speak as you do," I 
put in. 388 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Men like me are frustrated," he went on, with the same 
bitterness. "We know there is some good in the West just as 
there is some good in the East. But we cannot say this. The 
government is made up of backward politicians who are not 
even Arabs, but Turks, Kurd s, Cherkez [Circassians from 
the Caucasus]. They have neither the soul nor the culture of an 
Arab. They are so fanatic that th ey do not even like us to speak 
a foreign language. 
"We need a social revolution to overcome our curses," 
Sabaa went on. "Otherwise we are condemned to be ruled by 
foreigners, by fanatics, conde mned to be backward, con- 
demned, condemned. . . ." He sp at out the words. "There is 
no truth in Damascus. There is much hypocrisy. Those who 
say 'speak the truth' are the first liars of Damascus. Those who 
say 'keep pure' are the first to go to bad women. . . . The 
men here are hungry for women," he went on earnestly. "I 
myself would like to meet one. But it is very difficult to meet 
one when she wears a veil: she is afraid to speak to a stranger. 
It is haram. It is not pure, and she can be punished for it. And 
every woman is hungry for man. When I see a woman my 
eyes say: 'I am dying to meet you.' And the girl shows the 
same picture in her face, but I don't dare speak to her, and 
she does not dare speak to me. . . . Damascus is a small city. 
There are no secrets. When I see a man talking to a strange 
woman, I tell my friends: 'I saw this man talking with this 
woman in secret.'" 
"Why do you bother to do that?" I asked, curiously. 
"Because I am hungry for the woman myself. I am proud 
to talk against her before my friends. I am hungry, very 
hungry, and because I cannot have her I do not want them to 
have her for themselves." 
"But they may be talking innocently. Why condemn them 
both?" 
"It is true they may not speak evil the first time. But they 
will meet again. No man would want to marry a woman who Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 389 
had been touched by another. I would not marry such a girl. 
Therefore I tell my friends that I saw such a girl talking to 
such a stranger to warn them against marrying the girl." 
The Moslem code of perverted morality is so severe that 
hand-holding among teen-agers on the street or in the movies 
is frowned upon. It would be unthinkable for an Arab to be 
seen walking with his arm around a lady's waist. Innocent 
kissing in public would instantly land both parties in jail, 
charged with gross immorality. On the other hand, no odium 
and no penalties are attached to  similar homosexual demon- 
strations in public. 
"Do you think this code of relationship between men and 
women is normal?" I asked. 
"No, it is not normal. It is wrong. But it is custom. The 
young men here try to change the custom, but the old ones 
are against every new thing. They say: 'We were raised with- 
out these pleasures. Why should we allow you to have them?' 
My doctor says to me: 'You must marry or you must be friends 
with a girl because of your health.' I cannot marry because I 
do not have enough money, and I cannot find a girl to be 
friends with." 
"It must be very difficult," I said consolingly. 
"I am lucky to know some bad women. My friends who are 
unlucky ask me where to meet th em. I refuse to tell. Ahh . . . 
I want to live a pure life. I want to meet a girl who has an 
idea of love. I have read of Western love. I have seen it in the 
cinema. I think if must be a very wonderful experience. There 
is no conception of love in Damascus. What they call love be- 
gins in bed and ends in bed. Syria is not like America. When I 
see a girl I wish to marry, I cannot tell her my wish, but I 
must first tell my mother. If she approves she must then go 
to her father to ask: 'How much do you want for your daugh- 
ter?' The price is usually the money he has spent on her since 
her birth. Sometimes he makes a big profit. Money is only for 
the beautiful girls. Many poor Syrians marry without money 390 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
—they get the ugly girls—and are unhappy. Our women adore 
money. We prefer money to everything else. I am sorry for 
this. I am sorry we have no ideals of love." 
"How about the other kind of love?" I asked Sabaa. 
"There is much of that here. I think it is an unjust method. 
But when men do not meet women, they go with young boys. 
Men who have their boys say: 'This is my boy. He belongs to 
me.' They do not permit anyone else to touch him. They give 
the boy money for food and clothes. As for me, I do not de- 
sire a young boy." 
"Don't the boys' parents object?" 
"If they are poor what can they do? I know of one old man 
who pays the boy and also his family. You see now why our 
need is for a social revolution?  W h e n  w e  h a v e  i t ,  r e f o r m s  w i l l  
follow." 
"I have learned much from you," I said to Sabaa. "I should 
very much like to meet your chief and learn about the Arabic 
Club." 
"I will arrange a meeting at the club tomorrow," he said, 
and we parted. 
That evening I decided to move from the Amawi where 
my room was proving intolerably hot, to a larger and airier na- 
tive hotel, the Grand Barada. I was given a room on the top 
floor, with a commanding view of Damascus in three direc- 
tions. 
THE BOMBING OF DAMASCUS 
I AWOKE with a start: it was early dawn. As I looked at 
my watch, I heard the familiar roar of crashing bombs and 
the whirring of motors. Surely not in Damascus, one hundred 
and fifty air miles from the battle zone! Through the window 
I saw a low flying plane about a half mile away, silhouetted 
faintly against the sun along the rim of the mountains fencing 
Damascus on the south. A small metallic object dropped from Damascus; Jewel of the Orient 391 
its belly; a powerful cloud of dus t and timbers shot into the 
air. I became aware of two planes, not one. The one at my left 
was dropping bombs while moving toward the open desert, 
followed by the other. Would they circle as they had circled 
Amman, and ring Damascus with bombs? In that case the 
Grand Barada, and my room in particular, would be a prime 
target, for we were only a block from the Hedjaz railway 
depot, and adjacent to the main police station. Hastily I dug 
out a camera, and from my window photographed history in 
the making—the first Jewish bombing of Damascus—catching 
two sets of dust clouds above the wreckage. 
Ten minutes after the planes—four-engine American bomb- 
ers—had disappeared into the desert, anti-aircraft guns shook 
the waking city. Shouting police halted traffic, shoved pedes- 
trians into doorways, and helped spread panic, long after the 
planes had vanished. 
Later, as I was going out, the hotel clerk called me aside: 
"Be careful today, please. You have an American passport." 
"Hold it for me till I come back," I said, taking it out. 
"Do not go out now, please. Wait a few hours." 
Suspicious at first, I realized that he had my welfare in 
mind. 
It was noon when I ventured out, heading in the direction 
of the Parliament, which obviously had been the target. The 
bombs, however, had dropped several hundred yards away, in 
a thickly populated area. The death toll was twenty-two; one 
hundred fifty-six were wounded, many seriously. Through 
street after street I followed the planes' trail westward. They 
had dropped their last load of bombs in a new residential area 
only five hundred yards from the American Consulate. They 
had killed the president of the Imperial Bank of Iran, and 
wrecked the home of Clarence O. Eyer, an American official 
of the Near East Foundation. Lu ckily, he had been visiting a 
friend and his wife and children were in Beirut. Near by I saw 
a policeman guarding what seemed to be a garbage can. I went 
over to him, curious. 392 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"That is an unexploded Jewish bomb!" he explained. 
The bomb was, in fact, a garbage can, probably filled with 
scrap metal and dynamite and its  lid soldered down. I saw no 
fuse. I bad no idea what detonated these homemade affairs. 
I knew what I had seen: the ashcans hurtling to the ground 
became lethal block-busters when they struck. It occurred to 
me suddenly that this "dud" might well be a time bomb. I had 
no means of telling this to the policeman, so I got quickly 
away from there. 
Psychologically, this terror raid by the Jews on Damascus 
had a more devastating effect than that on Amman. It gave 
an entirely exaggerated view of Israel's strength. It cowed the 
Syrians, who had been given the impression they were winning 
decisively in Palestine. Had not their touted chieftain, Fawzy 
Bey el Kawoukjy, with a home in Damascus, proclaimed his 
personal victories? Arabs in th e street couldn't get over the 
fact that the once lowly Jew—four thousand of whom were 
cooped up in their Damascus gh etto, afraid to venture out— 
had used four-engine bombers! 
Ill tidings travel fast. What Arab city would be attacked 
next? When would it come? Would there be two planes or 
twenty four-engine bombers? If two planes could kill twenty- 
two and injure one hundred and fi fty-six, what casualties would 
twenty or thirty planes inflict? Syrians asked. A frightened peo- 
ple will believe any myth. Rumors spread that Jews also had 
an atom bomb and Einstein was its inventor. Never in their 
history had such fears seized the Arab capitals. Little Israel— 
with its retaliatory air raids—had struck a decisive blow in the 
war against the Arab States. 
That afternoon I interviewed Salah Fattah el Imam, D.D.S., 
president of the Arabic Club, to which my friend Sabaa be- 
longed. Its membership included intellectuals, lawyers, physi- 
cians, government officials, and engineers of pro-German per- 
suasion. Although the group numerically had always been 
small, Hitler Youth leader Ba ldur von Schirach, on his way 
to Baghdad, had stopped off in Damascus to meet with Dr. Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 393 
Imam and representatives of his club. I introduced myself to 
Dr. Imam as Artour Marmarian. Although I had used my true 
name throughout the Arab world,  I hesitated about revealing 
it to him lest he check with the local Armenian Dashnags. 
"Look what you have done to us!" Dr. Imam exploded. 
"Four-engine bombers have neve r attacked Damascus before. 
In the coffee houses, everywhe re, people are asking: 'Where 
did the Jews get the four-engin e bombers?' From America! 
From America! Do you blame us if we turned our eyes to 
Germany before, or now turn them to Russia? An enemy of 
your enemy is your friend." 
Dr. Imam was a bustling little Semite with warm brown eyes, 
full brows, prominent nose, and a large bald dome of a head. 
He was a dentist and had studie d in Germany. "We are against 
Communism, but against Russia—no! What have the Rus- 
sians done to hurt us? Why break every relation with Moscow 
for nothing? We have seen very bad things from France, Eng- 
land, and America. When the times comes for choosing, we 
will chose any State which will help us. Our trouble is that we 
Arabs still think with our hear ts, not our heads. We must 
change the pattern of life in order for us to compete with the 
rest of the world. We need to have a good cleaning—inside 
and out. Other nations have learned from Germany. So can 
we. If German medicine was good, if their automobiles and 
guns were good, how could their philosophy be bad, Herr 
Marmarian?" 
Finding me a ready listener, he went on: 
"Hitler became a success becau se of Goebbels's propa- 
ganda. Herr Marmarian, there is a proverb in Arabic: 'With 
one eye you are king among the blind.' In Syria no one knows 
how to make propaganda. Any one who has ability for propa- 
ganda becomes king. I can lead the Syrian people. I can give 
them an order and they will execute it. That was the way with 
the German people, and today wi th the Russian people. Oh, I 
cannot wait till the old men with  old ideas die, so young peo- 
ple with young ideas can take their place. That is the work of  
Poster on dispiay in Damascus shop urges the boycott of American 
goods: "O, you Arab! America is the enemy of the Arabs, the 
adopted daughter of Zionism, and its supporter. Boycott her mer- 
chandise which carry the mark—'U. S. A.' Boycott is the sharpest 
arm you possess. Prove your nationalist consciousness by executing 
the boycott very minutely!!'" Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 395 
the Arabic Club: to train Arab youth for the leadership of to- 
morrow, to build a confederation of Arab States which will 
earn the respect of the criminal English, the immoral French, 
and you Americans who are helping the Jews. Some day you 
will be sorry." 
Herr Doktor Imam had spoken and I took my leave. 
A NIGHT IN DAMASCUS 
ONLY kismet could have led me to a tiny restaurant-tavern 
on the bank of the Barada River. The place was native, but 
the customers were largely non- Arab. It was a small, stuffy 
dive, the tables covered with red-checkered cloth, the floor 
filthy and buzzing with flies. Behind the counter was a well- 
weathered but otherwise still serviceable Arab girl. The waiter 
—an oily character with a skin the color of faded wrapping- 
paper—was also the proprietor. The place smelled of rot and 
evil. Here I struck a friendship with Stefan Meyer, which 
opened strange new vistas for me. A thin, colorless youth, with 
watery eyes and hollow cheeks, Stefan was drinking native 
beer, and complaining to the proprietor in English. 
"You are right," I said. "The beer here tastes like warmed-up 
dishwater." 
"I have imported but it costs much more," the oily man 
said. 
"Nothing is too good for a German. Bring us two bottles 
of the best." 
"Ahh, an Amerikan." 
"Yahwohl! but one who loves the Germans and the Arabs." 
The oily one brought the beer. "Bring another glass, sadiqi, 
my friend, and join us in our toast: "To the great German 
people! To the great Arab people!" 
When Stefan had finished his bottle and was in an expan- 
sive mood I plied him with questions. By this time I had made 
sure he "knew" about me: that I had been a member of the 396 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
German-American Bund, an Am erican Nazi and Jew-hater. 
"Now tell me about yourself," I said casually. 
He had been caught by the English on a submarine off Italy 
and imprisoned in various camps.  Finally, he and another Ger- 
man, a captain in the Wehrmacht, had escaped. They had 
been fighting with the Arabs since then. He and other Ger- 
mans had fought in Katamon in  Jerusalem (confirming Israeli 
disclosures that instructions had been found there in Ger- 
man). I noted that Stefan was well-dressed and smoked ex- 
pensive cigarettes. 
"I don't receive money from any Arabs. Someone else gives 
it when I need it," he said. "You will meet many Germans 
here. We have headquarters here and in Beirut. There arc also 
many Yugoslav Moslems here. Some of them are living in a 
mosque. I will introduce you to them. Yugoslavs and Germans 
are everywhere in the Syrian army. Ach, we had a bloody time. 
These Arabs think you can win a war by talking instead of by 
discipline and sacrifice." 
"I've been with them. I know. Have you been hurt fight- 
ing?" 
"I've just come out of the hospital. My body is still full of 
shrapnel. Here, feel this." Stefan  rolled up his sleeve. His arm 
was lacerated with healing flesh wounds. "Thirty-two days in 
the hospital!" 
"Tonight let's celebrate," I said. "Let's go to a night-club." 
When I met Stefan later, the Damascus sky was bright with 
stars, especially brilliant over the blacked-out city. Stefan was 
dressed to kill. 
"Let's go to the best place in town," he said. 
"Yallah!" 
We walked up a dark street, turned into another, even 
darker, and reached the Garden of the Orient. I paid the ad- 
mission. Inside, we seated ourselves at a table under a tree. I 
saw that we were in a fenced-in open-air casino dotted with Damascus: Jewel of the Orient 397 
tables and trees, with a small st age at one end. The bulbs had 
been covered with a coating of  blue paint, giving the place a 
weird bluish glow. Seated at the empty tables were a half 
dozen women—hostesses—in search  of drinking-mates. They 
ranged from a thin wisp of a girl to a charmer of mammoth 
proportions. The waiter told us that a bottle of beer "with a 
woman" cost eight lira; "without a woman" the price was 
three. 
A wench came over and sat between us. She began to paw, 
and to be pawed by, Stefan. She wanted us to order cham- 
pagne. When we both laughed her taste changed to beer. 
"Venez apres. Come later," I said to her, using French, for 
if she learned I was American—and therefore rich—she'd 
never leave our table. I got rid of her finally and two others 
who tried their charms. I did no t want Stefan distracted. My 
purpose in bringing him here was to learn more from him 
about the local Nazis and Yugosl avs. I was just finishing my 
glass of beer when I almost choked on hearing a deep voice 
behind me: "Hello, American!" 
"Who is it?" I asked Stefan in alarm. He was facing the 
speaker. 
"I cannot sec. Three Arabs are sitting in a very deep shade." 
"Hello, American," the voice called out again. 
I made sure all my Arab credentials were with me before 
turning around. I could not make out the three men. 
"We have met before in Jerusalem. Do you remember?" 
the voice said. 
I chilled at the thought: Was it Nassib Boulos? Had he 
trailed me to Damascus? What had he learned about me? Was 
it the officer in charge of Sur Bahir? Or was it an agent of 
Farhan Bey in Amman who recognized me? ... I rose and 
walked over to the table cautious ly. When I saw who it was, I 
broke out in a delighted exclamation: "Fadhil Rashid Bey, my 
dear brother! What are you doing here?" 
It was the former military commander of Jerusalem, whom 398 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I had photographed with Mousta fa. Fadhil Bey had told me 
I was the finest photographer in the world. "Sit down with 
us, please," he said. 
He was on his way to Baghdad. I introduced Stefan. 
"Ahh, a German. Finest of the Europeans. Let us drink to 
the Germans." 
We raised our glasses of arak. We ordered more arak, and 
hors d'oeuvres. Then roasted pumpkin-seeds and chickpeas, 
which take the place of American pretzels and potato chips. 
"Let us drink to the few good Americans like our friend 
here," Stefan said. "I met him only today, but he's one hun- 
dred per cent." 
"I know him from Jerusalem. He's two hundred per cent— 
one hundred Arab, one hundred German," Fadhil Bey put in, 
raising his glass. 
"We leave Truman out of this toast. He's a Zionist," I said. 
"Let's wish him the first place in hell," Fadhil Bey roared. 
"Ahh, how Hitler was misunderst ood in Europe," he resumed, 
after the arak had scorched its way down our throats. "He was 
a great man, a very great man. He was an enemy of our ene- 
mies, therefore our friend. He died, unrecognized, misunder- 
stood." 
"He should have been born Mo slem. Then he would have 
been appreciated," I said. 
"Heil Hitler," Stefan burst out, sentimentally. 
"A toast to the memory of the great German fuehrer," 
Fadhil Bey said. 
"Heil Hitler!" 
"May he come to rule again!" 
"Heil Hitler!" 
My head reeled. Where was I—in Berlin? What year was 
this—1938? Was Hitler really dead? I recalled that the Arab 
with whom I was sitting had ta ken part in the abortive 1941 
Nazi putsch in Iraq. Caught by the British, he had been im- 
prisoned in South Africa, had escaped, and eventually had 
been made military commander in Jerusalem by the Grand Damascus: Jewel of  the Orient 399 
Mufti, with whom he had cons pired in Baghdad. . . . "Heil 
Hitler!" 
Amid the heilings I heard the sound of music. On the stage 
an Oriental banjo-player and a drummer, both in shirtsleeves, 
had taken their places. There began a monotonous, though 
haunting melody with strings, and the beating of the fore- 
fingers on a long narrow drum. And now, despite the black- 
out, a small light gleamed on the stage. Into its soft glow a 
woman stepped in bare feet, her flesh bare except for a thin 
halter and veil-like covering below. She was a raqs-essurat, a 
dancer of the navel. For a moment Truman and the Germans 
were forgotten, and the men looked dreamily at the dancer: a 
large, voluptuous woman, with double of everything by Amer- 
ican standards—the acme of the Oriental conception of 
feminine beauty. 
She greeted the audience appropriately with her belly, then 
broke into a sultry song to the rhythm of her quaking body, 
the banjo, and the tom-tom beat of the drummer. I noted 
that the technique of the Oriental belly-dance differed funda- 
mentally from the American. There was no quick violent 
climactic ending, but a slow, sinuous, sizzling gyration with 
manifold twists and bumps, which reached semiclimaxes, sub- 
sided to gentle writhing, and th en began all over again. It was 
explained to me that this was intended to convey endless 
Oriental pleasure, a marathon of love play which did not end 
in quick exhaustion. It was intended to continue indefinitely, 
save for brief pauses to partake of food, drink, and hasheesh 
between orgies. 
At times Fatima would stop her provocative dance and 
croon an extraordinary torch song. She expressed passion not 
by words or gestures, or movements of her body, but almost 
entirely by her voice—which she used expertly to inflame the 
emotions. Habibi, mi habibi! Love, my love! . . . She trilled 
the phrase over and over two to three minutes at a time, her 
low, moaning voice rising to a high-pitched crescendo, then 
snaking up and down the scale with such depth of feeling, such 400 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
variety of mood, such earthy suggestiveness, that words were 
unnecessary. ... I looked around. Hostesses of the Garden 
of the Orient were busy under the fig trees drinking with and 
entertaining the amorous Arabs. The blue lights and the star- 
light and the small bulb lighting the stage cast a tropical glow 
on everything about me. A warm desert wind rustled through 
the trees. The rhythmic beat of  the tom-tom sounded like the 
far-off" call to a mystic ritual. 
"Arak! Waiter, more arak!" 
"A toast to the dancer!" 
"To the Passion Queen of the Nile. May the River of Life 
never go dry." 
"Allah, Allah! Allah, Allah!" 
Thus was the night spent, heiling the gods of madness and 
of passion. (CHAPTER XXII) 
DAS ARABISCHE BURO: 
DER GROSSMUFTI 
"I am sure you will love America better after you 
have finished seeing the Arab countries. If I were 
in America I would not leave it even for a second. I 
would stay till I grew roots in the ground." 
Hayredin, Disillusioned Holy Warrior 
"LET'S go see our Yugoslav friends," Stefan said when I met 
him at the tavern the next day. Together we walked to the 
Sultan Selim Mosque. Its multitude  of buildings and pilgrim's 
quarters covered several acres; we entered a long, cavernous 
series of damp, shabbily furnished rooms, beneath a succes- 
sion of cupolas. At the end of these brick-lined caves was a 
large kitchen. Here I met Hayredin Dubravac, the only one 
among the Yugoslav Moslems who spoke English. He was a 
short, studious youth, wearing glasses and dressed in a rumpled 
white shirt and drab trousers. There was a beaten look about 
him. 
"Ahh, from Amerika. How glad I am to see an Amerikan!" 
Hayredin exclaimed. 
"What are you doing in the kitchen?" I asked Hayredin. 
"Cooking. This week is my turn to be cook. Again we are 
having a hash of macaroni, beans, lentils, onions, and stale 402 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
bread. We had it yesterday and we will have it again tomor- 
row." 
"But it is Ramadan [the Moslem holy days]. You are sup- 
posed to fast." 
"Every day is Ramadan for us. If we do not eat, we will 
fall from weakness," Hayredin answered. 
I offered him all the cigarettes and candy I had. 
"I cannot understand this," I said. "You fought for the 
Arab cause. A few months ago I saw a Yugoslav who had lost 
his arm in Haifa. Why are they treating you this way?" 
"Let's go outside and talk," he suggested. We walked 
through the dark rooms. Stopping in one, Hayredin went to 
a bed in the corner. The face under the covers was unshaven, 
gaunt with the pallor of coming death. "He has anemia, but 
we can do nothing," Hayredin said. In another room was an- 
other still form—of a youth with his foot in a cast. "The mili- 
tary hospital is full. They sent him here—to eat our hash." 
After a while Hayredin spoke again. "There is a saying: 'If 
you have not been poor you cannot appreciate riches.' I am 
sure you will love America better after you have finished see- 
ing the Arab countries. If I were in America I would not 
leave it even for a second. I would stay till I grew roots in the 
ground." Hayredin said this with such emotion that I swal- 
lowed hard. "The Syrian municipality pays us sixty piastres a 
day [20 cents] on which to buy food, clothing, and other 
necessities. We cut each other's hair and sharpen our razor 
blades on a stone. It has taken me nine days to get a pair of 
used shoes from the Islam Relief Foundation." 
We sat at the edge of a pool in the center of the courtyard. 
A dozen of his companions were washing their clothing. 
Hayredin continued: 
"I am a Croatian, the son of a well-to-do father. I was study- 
ing to be a pharmacist when the Grand Mufti came and urged 
us to fight for Islam by joining the German army. Thousands 
of us did what we thought was our duty. I was captured and 
made prisoner in Italy. After th e war many of us were afraid Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 403 
to go back because we fought on the side of Pavelich. The 
International Refugee Organizati on offered us a choice of go- 
ing to almost any country. When the Arab League promised 
to take care of three thousand Moslems, I picked Syria be- 
cause the Arabs are my religious brothers. But I am disap- 
pointed." 
"Did you fight in Palestine?" 
"Of course. Where do you think I got these clothes? No- 
where except from the Jews! Those who didn't fight have no 
clothes today. I fought four months. Many of my friends are 
still with the Arab armies. Those with technical ability are 
working for the Syrian govern ment. Others are working as 
servants and laborers, receiving half of what an Arab gets. I 
have been offered farm work for 2.50 lira [70 cents] but I 
cannot buy shoes and clothing which will need replacement, 
and the heavy food I will have to cat for the heavy work. It's 
more economical to stay here and do nothing. Our future is 
absolutely dark," Hayredin sai d resignedly. "No one wants us 
now. We can not get a visa to go elsewhere. We are stateless, 
homeless, friendless." 
This was their reward fo r helping fight the Jehad. 
NAZIS UNDER COVER 
LATE in the afternoon Stefan took me to the Orient Palace, 
Damascus's leading hotel, to meet Captain Mahmoud Zano- 
vitch. "Mahmoud's real name is Keil," he confided. "Many of 
our boys use Arab names." 
In the small barroom of the hotel we saw a powerfully built 
man with a thick neck, his head bald, round, and shiny. He 
was working over a notebook with the aid of a dictionary. 
When Stefan asked him about Zanovitch, the man—with a 
suspicious look at me—told us he  was in Palestine. The bald- 
headed man—whether he was a German or a Yugoslav Nazi I 404 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
never learned—sniffed at me for a while, and asked Stefan 
questions. Rising, he said we might expect Zanovitch soon— 
and left us abruptly. A half hour later, a short, dynamic man 
with an extremely alert manner walked briskly to our table. 
After Stefan's glowing introduction, Keil became friendly. 
He told me had served under N azi General Hans Guderian, 
and fought in Smolensk and Stalingrad. Later he had joined 
quisling Pavelich. Keil was a career militarist, an expert trainer 
and technician, and was engaged in that capacity in the Syrian 
army. 
"What is your impression of the Arab as a fighter?" I 
asked. 
Keil grimaced. "I have no respect for the Arab soldier. But 
I don't want to talk about the Arabs. I want to talk about you 
Americans. You are pushing Europe into the arms of Com- 
munism. Germany was the only nation which could have 
stopped Communism, but Roosevelt and Churchill destroyed 
it. Russia has a standing army of six million. She is organizing 
German prisoners of war in a nother huge army. She's only one 
night's ride from the Rhine. Russi a can be inside the Pyrenees 
in eight days. Italians can't fight. The French don't want to 
fight. Spain has nothing to fight with. England will draw back 
into her island to defend herself. Who will fight? Who will 
stop Russia? American troops again? If war starts, can you 
rush over two million men with full equipment inside of a 
month? Atomic weapons and bombs are not enough. You 
have to have land troops. Without a strong Germany Europe 
is finished. Only now the Allies are realizing that Hitler was 
right." 
I believe the only reason Keil saw me was to give me a piece 
of his mind. I was satisfied, for I had met, face to face, a Nazi 
trainer of the Syrian army. It did not surprise me, after I had 
returned to the United States,  to hear Walter Winchell an- 
nounce that the reorganization of some units of the Syrian 
army had been entrusted to Colonel Hans von Zempelhof. 
A day later my investment in Stefan paid off richly again. Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 405 
"Tonight I'm having supper with Said Abdullah Harb," he 
said. "His real name"—he laughed—"is Herbert von Furst!" 
When we arrived at the tavern-restaurant, I found a hand- 
some, blond, blue-eyed German sitting before a bottle of 
cognac. Behind his chair was a pair of crutches. Cognac glass 
in one hand, he stretched out the other in greeting: 
"Join me for supper," he said loudly. "Solid food disagrees 
with me." 
A Jewish bullet had caught von Fu rst, and his leg had been 
amputated. 
"My bad luck was when the Jews didn't shoot me in the 
head. Believe me, I'm finished with these Arabs. I hate it 
here. I was a hero when I was fighting from Jaffa to Jerusalem 
for them, but now that I'm a cripple they tell me to------" He 
paused. "When they took me to the hospital for a blood trans- 
fusion I wouldn't let them put Arab blood in me. I asked for 
American, English, French, an y Aryan blood. They had to 
take me to another hospital and I almost died on the way; but 
I have all Aryan blood in me now. Those Arabs fixed me in 
another way. They stole my suitcase. I had gold and jewelry of 
all kinds which I had taken from Jews. They stole everything 
—the thieves!" 
He swallowed another cognac. Stefan was matching him, 
glass for glass. 
"There is nothing for me to do. I must drink. I leave the 
government hospital at 10.30 a.m. I put my foot in one 
restaurant, then another. I drink and I smoke, drink, and 
smoke again. Again and again. But I will change," he con- 
fided, "when I get married." 
"Who is the girl?" I asked. 
"The daughter of a very rich, high Syrian official. I do not 
want to many, but I must. I don't want to walk on a crutch 
the rest of my life. I want a new leg, which is very expensive. 
My father-in-law has promised to buy me one, so that when I 
marry I will have a new leg, a wife, money, a house, a job." 
"What kind of a job?" 406 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Training Syrians. I'll train them in everything—from 
bomb-making to artillery-bombing. My job is waiting. I will 
get 560 liras a month." 
"Stefan told me that the Grand Mufti had helped you 
escape," I said. 
"Ahh, yes. I know the Mufti very well. He cried when he 
saw I had lost my leg. He is not rich. He is personally very 
honest, but the men around him are crooks. Maybe he will 
give me the ten thousand liras [about $3,500] he has promised 
me for my marriage. Just yesterday he gave me two thousand 
liras." 
"I've been promised two hundred by the Mufti," Stefan 
said, turning to me. "I'm meeting him tomorrow morning." 
"I should very much like to come with you," I said to Stefan 
as casually as I could. 
"Let us meet here at ten o'clock and go together." 
It happened that swiftly. I could not believe that I would at 
last have an opportunity to interview the Mufti, whom I had 
been trailing ever since leaving London. 
MEETING THE GRAND MUFTI 
STEFAN and I met as planned, and we hurried to tree-lined 
Halbouny street in the residen tial section of Damascus. Half 
a dozen guards milled before the black iron door of a house 
midway in the block. The high stone fence around it—studded 
on top with broken glass, in ad dition to its iron grillwork— 
completely shut off the interior. We were searched, then our 
papers were gone into thoroughl y before the iron door opened 
and we were commanded to sit on two chairs a good distance 
from the house itself. 
I found myself in a typically beautiful Damascus patio. 
Poplars rose high, dwarfing the apricot, quince, pomegranate, 
and fig trees that circled the courtyard. To the left were the Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 407 
servants' quarters; to the right a footpath led to the house; 
midway a fountain Sowed into a square pool filled with gold- 
fish. Armed guards were prowling everywhere in the romantic 
garden. They were armed with  machine-guns and every other 
variety of weapon. Grenades and handcuffs dangled from their 
belts. I counted twenty-eight different species of armed goons. 
I do not frighten easily, but I confess that the two hours I 
spent in this idyllic patio were probably the most uncomforta- 
ble of my stay with the Arabs. I could not suppress my fears: 
suppose someone walked in and recognized me as Carlson; 
suppose they learned I wrote Under Cover; suppose they 
learned I was anti-Nazi. The Mufti's trigger-men would take 
no chances. I'd be easier to shoot down than the proverbial 
duck in a barrel. Every time the black iron door opened I 
turned away my face, or bent to fix my shoelace till it wore 
thin, so as not to be spotted. 
An unending stream of Arabs—in native, European, and 
military dress—walked in and out. I recognized an important 
Arab official: Emil Ghoury, the Mufti's Jew-baiting public- 
relations counsel whom I had met in Egypt. I recognized sev- 
eral others from Jerusalem. Apparently the Mufti was here 
with his entire entourage. Much kissing went on. Several pairs 
of Arab officers kissed each othe r noisily on the checks. One 
Arab bent down and tried to kiss the hand of another; the one 
thus respected tried to withdraw his hand, but the first held 
on to it and smothered it with kisses. Husky young Arabs 
walked in and out holding hands, arm in arm, or more usually 
with their small fingers entwined. No woman entered or left. 
Shortly before noon, the Mufti's treasurer emerged from 
the house and presented Stefan with a prepared receipt. I 
lent him my pen and saw the German sign his name as 
"Stefan Werner Meyer." 
"Why the Werner?" I asked curiously. 
"The Syrians said that every Meyer was a Jew, so I put in 
Werner." 
"In America we have German Jews named Werner," I said. 408 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
The Mufti's treasurer reappeared  in a few minutes, counted 
two hundred Syrian liras in crisp new bills into Stefan's hands 
and disappeared into the house. 
"This," Stefan said disgustedly, pointing to the equivalent of 
sixty dollars, "is for the month I spent in the stinking hospital, 
for all the Jews I killed." 
Shortly after the noon hour, the Mufti himself appeared on 
the porch. His treasurer motioned us to come over. I bent 
low, and with my hand on my heart, said in Turkish: 
"Your Eminence. I have long awaited this honor." 
"I understand you are Armenian," the Mufti said. 
"I am glad you called me an Armenian," I said, "and not an 
American." 
"I know the Armenians. I have met with the Dashnags." 
"Ahh. Your Eminence has met the best Armenians. I my- 
self am a member of the Dashnag. ... I am also a friend of 
Captain Robert Gordon-Canning of London. Do you remem- 
ber him?" 
"Of course I remember the captain, a great friend of the 
Arabs." 
"Your Eminence, what are your plans now regarding Pales- 
tine?" 
"Our plans as always are to fight until we have won com- 
pletely." 
"Will King Abdullah's troops in Palestine complicate the 
situation?" (The Mufti resented Abdullah's ambitions in Pal- 
estine, and his henchmen spoke violently against Abdullah.) 
"I do not give interviews," the Mufti observed, smiling, as 
his men moved in to press the point. 
The Mufti, I noted, was a short man, with a large white 
turban wound around his head; a long black cloak covered 
him completely to the ankles. His eyes were bluish, and his 
skin fair. His beard was grayin g softly, and was white at the 
tip. His ears were conspicuous and protruding. To my sur- 
prise, he looked meek, and had a rather gentle though ex- Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 409 
tremely alert and sagacious look about him. Perhaps the 
delineation of his true character escaped me. 
"Will Your Eminence let me take your photograph?" 
"Yes, at the other door." 
The Mufti led us through th e house to a rear entrance 
opening on another street. A half  hour before he stepped out 
the back way, the street was clo sed to traffic and even pedes- 
trains were kept out. The Mufti posed for two shots against a 
background of stone and iron bars which covered all the 
windows. 
"Tchok memnounum. Thank you very much," I said in 
Turkish, as the Mufti stepped into his bullet-proof car. 
It now remained for me only to meet Marouf Dawalibi—the 
professor of law at Syrian University who had "rescued" the 
Mufti from French custody—after which I planned to make a 
quick exit. After considerable difficulty, I finally arranged the 
interview on the pretext that I wanted to write a story about 
him for Al Misri—the Egyptian newspaper whose credentials 
I still carried. Dr. Mohassen Shaf ik would act as interpreter. 
I was anxious to get the interview over with. Dr. Imam of 
the Arabic Club worried me. I had seen him several times, on 
one occasion taking Stefan along. To my alarm, Imam had 
said: "You have asked me some direct questions. I have been 
thinking them over. Now I want to ask you some questions." 
Dr. Imam had the look of a man who had discovered some- 
thing and meant to get to the bottom of it. 
"I am at your service, my friend. We have time. I'm at the 
Grand Barada Hotel. Phone me in a few days." 
It was with more than usual eagerness, therefore, that I 
called on Dr. Shafik the next day. Speaking excellent English, 
he explained that he was an Egyptian loaned by Alexandria 
University to the Syrian government. Together we went into 
an adjoining room, in one corner  of which, before a desk, sat 
the man who had "liberated" the Mufti. 
Marouf Dawalibi, a prominent chieftain of the Ikhwan el 410 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Muslimin in Damascus, rose to greet me. The face I saw I 
wished never to see again, even in a nightmare. If ever I saw a 
Mephistopheles in the flesh, Da wahbi was it! He was dressed 
in a black striped frock coat, coming to his knees. Beady black 
eyes shone behind his black-rimmed glasses. They looked me 
over icily. A thin mustache crawled over his upper lip. A 
short, stubby beard—which had neither the dignity nor aes- 
thetic quality of a full beards—stretched from ear to ear like a 
grimy smear. His ears were large, his nose fleshy. His full lips 
were the color of dried blood. It was the quality of his eyes, 
however, which drew my attention most. They were the cold- 
est I had seen and held me like a cobra's. 
Here is Dawalibi's story: 
"My friendship with the Mufti began in 1942 when, as a 
student in Paris, I visited His Eminence in Germany. I stayed 
forty days. I paid him a second visit in 1943. This time I 
stayed fifty days. As France was under German occupation 
the visits naturally had the approval of the military authori- 
ties. On these trips I found the Mufti healthy and very happy 
with the work he was doing. 
"After the war he escaped, and was put under protective 
custody in France where I met him a number of times. At 
Erst he was under strict house arrest and no one was allowed 
to see him. Later he was given more and more freedom. Fi- 
nally the police were taken away, and three servants were 
appointed to watch over him. At this stage he was permitted 
to receive unlimited numbers of visitors and go away on short 
trips. When I went to bring him in June, 1946, the Mufti sent 
two of his servants to buy food, and sent the third on an 
errand. We were alone in the house, except for his chauffeur, 
a trusted servant from Damascus. We drove directly to the 
airport, where the arrangements had already been made." 
"Can you tell me more about those arrangements?" I asked. 
"The time has not arrived to gi ve all the details," Dawalibi 
said. 
"What passport did His Eminence use?" Das Arabische Biiro: der Grossmufti 411 
"He had a special passport." 
I had heard he had used the passport of an Englishman 
resembling him. 
"The Mufti," repeated Dawalib i in a harsh and impatient 
voice, "used a special passport. He used a false name. He was 
disguised. His beard was shaved off," Dawalibi continued: 
"Before the Mufti took the plane from Paris I had already 
examined the route." 
"How had you examined it?" 
"I wanted to know to what extent the route was under 
French and American military control. I also wanted to check 
if the plane would stop at British colonies, like Malta, or 
Cyprus. I therefore made a trip from Paris to Cairo, and was 
satisfied with the carelessness of the inspections and the safety 
of the flight as far as the Mufti' s needs were concerned. I rec- 
ommended that His Eminence make the trip. We are all 
thankful to Allah that he arrived in Cairo safely." 
Dawalibi paused and smiled obliquely. "This is the portion 
of the story I can tell you. Other details must remain for a 
later day." 
I was satisfied. 
I hurried back to my hotel, and only a few doors away from 
it I saw Dr. Imam. I tried to dodge him but it was too late. 
His prowling eyes had seen me first. 
"I was on my way to see you," he said coldly. 
"Ahlen wa sahlen," I said. "Welcome." 
"I want to make an appointment to have a long talk with 
you." His suspicion of me showed clearly. 
"May I suggest we meet this afternoon, at my hotel?" 
"Very well. I will be over at five o'clock." 
Once in my hotel, I worked fast, for time was extremely 
short. I told the hotel clerk: "If anyone ever phones or asks 
for Mr. Marmarian, send them up to me," and slipped him 
baksheesh the size of which made his eyes pop. Remember, 
for callers I am Artour Marmarian." 
"Yes, sair. Yes, sair." 412 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
I had learned that a friendly consular official in Damascus 
was scheduled to leave for Beirut, the capital of Lebanon, the 
next day. He was indebted to me for a favor. I bundled to- 
gether my precious notes, my photographic files, and all my 
incriminating papers such as my press card from the Jewish 
Agency. I went through my pockets. Leaping into a taxi I 
took the packet to my friend with the plea that he leave it for 
me with friends in Beirut. Then I went to Stefan's house 
where I found him about to take a nap. "I'm leaving for 
Beirut immediately," I said. "Write me in care of the Ameri- 
can Embassy when you come, and we'll have a good time 
together." 
My house was clean. My work was done in Damascus. I 
could leave immediately for Lebanon, and duck Dr. Imam's 
call. Or I could keep my appointment with him. I decided on 
the latter course. 
Promptly at five my telephone rang: "Mr. Marmarian, Dr. 
Imam is here." 
"Send him up. . . . And bring us some iced lemonade." 
Dr. Imam was dressed in an immaculate white summer suit. 
"Mit ahlen wa sahlen, Herr Doktor. Welcome a hundred 
times," I said in my best Arabic-German manner. "Sit down, 
please." 
"How much longer are you going to stay in Damascus?" he 
began. 
"Oh, another week. I've just  had my permit extended. Why 
do you ask?" 
"I have heard good reports about you from members of the 
Arabic Club, but actually I know nothing about you. When- 
ever you see me you are in a hurry to leave. You ask many 
questions but you do not talk about yourself. I have checked 
at the airport here and in Beirut, and they had no record of 
your arrivals or departures." 
"I never travel by plane. I always take buses, railroads, or 
taxis." 
"We have lost faith in European journalists," Dr. Imam Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 413 
said. ''When they come here we are nice to them. We show 
them everything. We talk to them for days, but the Jews talk 
to them one hour, and they print what the Jews tell them." 
"There are bad men in every profession, Herr Doktor, even 
in yours. I have been with the Arabs many months. I have 
seen everything. I have collected the truth. I promise you, 
Herr Doktor, that I will write the absolute truth!" 
"I would like to believe you/' Dr. Imam said somewhat 
meekly. 
"I pledge on my honor as a journalist that I will tell the 
truth." 
"You have convinced me. I be lieve you/' Dr. Imam said. 
His next request, however, convinced me that he had many 
reservations. "I want you to tell me whom you visited in 
Amman, and those you have interviewed in Damascus. I 
would also like to know the name of your books and your 
address, so I can write you later—or have my American Arab 
friends visit you." 
"You are asking for a great deal of information. It will take 
several hours to put it all down. I have to go through my 
notes. Can we leave it for tomorrow afternoon? I shall pre- 
pare a lengthy report on myself. You will be satisfied. Let's 
have a lemonade. It has been a very hot day." 
Herr Doktor Salah Fattah el Imam is still waiting for my 
report. 
WHO IS THE MUFTI? 
Before taking leave of Damascus, I feel duty bound to 
clarify the Mufti's record. Winston Churchill conferred on 
him the distinction of being the deadliest enemy of the Brit- 
ish Empire. Edgar Ansel Mowrer, the foreign correspondent 
who disclosed his role with the Nazis, stated: "As a murderer, 
this man ranks with the great killers of history. As an enemy 414 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of the United Nations he was surpassed only by Hitler. In the 
evil of his intentions, Ilaj Amin equalled Hitler." 
Shortly after the end of World War II, Americans were in- 
formed over America's Town Meeting of the Air:1 "The 
Mufti is a patriot, is a gentleman, and he was just as patriotic 
and had a right to his opinions as Jefferson and Franklin had 
to theirs when they were fighting for American liberty." Since 
then apologists for the Mufti have spoken widely in his behalf 
in this country, and some of his associates—such as Emil 
Ghoury—have even served as his spokesmen at the United 
Nations. It is my fear that in the present period of panic and 
indecision which finds us courting Fascist Franco, Nazi Krupp, 
and many other Nazis and collaborators (in the delusion that 
we can defeat Communism with Fascist partners) our State 
Department may well face about and invite the Mufti into 
our camp. 
Who is this man? 
His full name is Ilaj Amin el Husseini, Mufti ("Mufti" 
meaning a high religious dignitary) of Jerusalem. The 
"Grand" is self-styled. As Jeru salem is now divided between 
Israel and Jordan—both of w hom hate Haj Amin—he is, in 
fact, an exiled, jobless Mufti. 
Haj Amin burst into notoriety in April, 1920, when to- 
gether with Moslem religious teachers he made inflammatory 
speeches on the streets of Jerusalem, and was charged with 
inciting the Arab mobs to violence against the Jews. As a re- 
sult, Arab hoodlums killed five Jews and wounded more than 
two hundred. He was tried by a British military court and 
sentenced in absentia, for he had already fled. Later, Britain's 
first High Commissioner for Palestine, Sir Herbert Samuel, a 
Jew, as a gesture of good will granted him a special pardon, 
and Haj Amin returned from exile. 
In 1921 the current Mufti of Jerusalem died, and Sir Her- 
bert was induced to appoint Haj Amin as the new Mufti from 
1 By Dr. Khalil Totah of the Institute of Arab American Affairs. See 
also Chapter II. Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 415 
among three candidates nominated by Moslem leaders. In 
1929, he repaid Sir Herbert a nd the British mandatory gov- 
ernment by again defying the law and instigating anti-Jewish 
attacks throughout Palestine. In 1936 Haj Amin founded the 
Arab Higher Committee to help promote his campaign for 
"Arab independence." A series of revolts, massacres, and riots 
followed immediately; the Committee was outlawed. A report 
in the files of the German High Command revealed that the 
Mufti was enabled to spearhead Axis propaganda in the Mid- 
dle East: "Only through the funds made available by Ger- 
many to the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem was it possible to carry 
out the revolt in Palestine." The Mufti took this opportunity 
to have hundreds of his political enemies liquidated; those re- 
fusing to make "donations" were also murdered by hench- 
men. By the time Haj Amin had finished fighting for "inde- 
pendence," no spokesman for genuine Arab independence 
remained. By 1937, however, the revolution had run its course, 
some of its leaders were exiled to Seychelles, and the Mufti 
was forced to flee again. 
THE IRAQI REVOLT 
HAJ AMIN spent two years as a fugitive in Lebanon and 
Syria, then suddenly turned up in Baghdad, where Iraq's pro- 
German Arabs vied with one another to entertain him. The 
Iraqi Parliament voted him a grant of $72,000. He received 
funds from the Iraqi Secret Service. Under a check-off system 
all Iraqi officials and civil servants paid him a percentage of 
their salaries. Funds flowed in from various political and chari- 
table groups. Gifts were received from Egypt and Ibn Saud, 
King of Saudi Arabia. The Mufti was also financed heavily by 
the Nazis and the Italians. 
Haj Amin lavished huge funds on the men he had placed 
in office, and gained enormous influence over Iraqi officials, 416 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
army generals, police chiefs. He controlled major appoint- 
ments; he whipped up Axis sentiment among the illiterate 
and fanatical masses for a Jehad against the Allied cause, and 
otherwise perfected his fifth column machine. Against this 
background Axis propaganda itsel f was intensified. Germany 
was set up as a "savior to the Moslem world," and Hitler was 
touted as "a descendant of the Prophet, the enemy of the 
Jews and the British, the Protector of Islam" who was devot- 
ing himself to the establishment of an Arab federation free 
from British control. Serving as virtually the uncrowned king 
of Iraq, the Mufti was now ready to write Hitler proposing 
"collaboration in all spheres," as follows: 
. . . Arabian nationalism owes your Excellency much grati- 
tude and recognition for the fact that you raised the Palestin- 
ian question repeatedly in public addresses. ... I should like 
to thank your Excellency again at this opportunity and to re- 
assure you, your Excellency, of the feelings of friendship, 
sympathy and admiration which the Arabian people devote 
to your Excellency, Great Leader, and the courageous Ger- 
man people. 
I take this opportunity to delegate my private secretary to 
the German Government so that—in the name of the strong- 
est and largest Arabian organization as well as in my own 
name—he may initiate the negotia tions necessary for a sin- 
cere and loyal collaboration in all spheres. 
In reply to this letter, Hitler's State Secretary Freiherr von 
Weizaecker wrote: 
The Fuehrer . . . has read your detailed report on the na- 
tional struggle of the Arabs with great interest and sympathy 
and was pleased with the friendly words which you addressed 
to him in the name of Arab Nationalism. ... I am author- 
ized to inform you of the following; 
... In agreement with your request . . . Germany is ready 
and willing to collaborate with you if in an effort to attain Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 417 
your national goal you should be impelled to fight against 
England, to grant you military  and financial support within 
the limits of the possible. In order to aid the Arabs in their 
preparations for a possible conf lict with England, Germany is 
further prepared to supply them immediately with war ma- 
terials if a way can be found to transport them. . . . 
I beg that this letter be kept  secret. The Italian government 
has been informed of its contents and is in agreement with it. 
According to a New York Times report, captured German 
documents later revealed that an agent of the Abwehr, the 
dreaded Nazi counter-espionage and sabotage unit of the 
Wehrmacht, arrived in Baghdad, disguised as a Rumanian 
businessman, "to carry on relations with the Mufti and prepare 
for [the] uprising." 
On April 21, 1941, under the Mufti's direction, the Iraqi 
politician, Rashid Ali el Khailani, with the aid of generals con- 
trolling the army, staged a coup against the Iraq government, 
forced the regent to flee, and made himself prime minister. 
King Farouk of Egypt and Riad el Solh, later Lebanon's prime 
minister, sent messages of encouragement. Forthwith, the 
Mufti issued a fatwa—the summons to a holy war: 
In the name of Merciful and Almighty Allah, I invite all 
my Moslem brothers throughout the whole world to join in 
the Holy War for Allah, for the defense of Islam and her 
lands against her enemy. O Faithful, obey and respond to my 
call. . . . 
... I invite you, O Brothers, to join in the War for Allah 
to preserve Islam, your independence and your lands from 
English aggression. I invite you to bring all your weight to 
bear in helping Iraq that she may throw off the shame that 
torments her. 
O Heroic Iraq, Allah is with Thee, the Arab Nation and 
the Moslem World are solidly w ith Thee in Thy Holy Strug- 
gle! 418 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
It was a critical hour for the Allies. With Iraq in Nazi 
hands, the next Axis step would be to cut off the Allies' 
Middle East oil supplies, block off Allied aid to the U.S.S.R., 
isolate British armies in the Middle East, and bring a junction 
of the German and Japanese for ces somewhere in Asia, sealing 
the Allied fate. 
But the Mufti was thwarted. First, British, New Zealand, 
and Jewish units from Palestine fought a ferocious though 
losing battle on the island of Crete, delaying German rein- 
forcements of troops and planes intended for Iraq. The time 
gained at Crete enabled Allied troops to be rushed from India 
and Palestine; under Glubb Pasha, they routed the Iraq army 
and the quisling gang. Fadhil Rashid Bey—the same Fadhil 
Bey with whom I had heiled Hitler—was caught. As the 
Mufti disappeared, the English placed a price of £25,000 on 
his head, "dead or alive." Just before the Iraqis capitulated, a 
blood feast took place in Baghdad: some 400 Jews were killed, 
countless Jews stabbed, and enormous Jewish property de- 
stroyed by both the fleeing Arabs and the local Arab rabble. 
Months later, the Rome radio announced: "The Mufti of 
Jerusalem, last heard of as taking refuge in the Japanese Lega- 
tion in Teheran, has arrived in Southern Italy. Italy, who 
knows the Mufti's sentiments of friendship and admiration 
for Fascism and the Duce, is glad to know he is safe." 
The Mufti was lodged in a villa outside Rome, met Musso- 
lini, made a number of broadcasts, and then went to Ger- 
many. The German Foreign Office welcomed him as "this 
great champion of Arab liberation and the most distinguished 
antagonist of England and of Jewry [who] is expected to re- 
main in Berlin for a long time." The Mufti met with Hitler. 
According to his diary—discovered later by Allied Intelligence 
—the Mufti quoted Hitler as assuring him: 
... we will reach the Southern Caucasus. . . . then the 
hour of the liberation of the Arabs will have arrived. . . . 
The hour will strike when you will be the lord of the supreme Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 419 
word, and not only the conveyor of our declarations. You will 
be the man to direct the Arab force and at that moment I 
cannot imagine what would happen to the Western peoples. 
DAS ARABISCHE BVRO: DER GROSSMUFTI 
IN GERMANY a special office was set up for the Mufti- 
Das Arabische Biiro: der Grossm ufti—and here he engaged in 
an amazing number of services. They included extensive 
short-wave broadcasts to Arab states, and to Moslem-popu- 
lated islands in the Pacific—all,  of course, earning the "de- 
voted feelings of esteem and r espect" of Japanese officials. The 
Mufti beamed to the United States: 
I want to draw the attention of  the Arab emigrants in Amer- 
ica to this fact ... I would remind them that their efforts will 
be wasted if, God forbid, America and her Allies are victorious 
in this war. For if that happened, the Arabs would never rise 
again. ... I therefore am confident that those Arab emi- 
grants in America will refrain from helping Roosevelt or from 
taking part in a war which he has brought on his country. 
An unending stream of paper propaganda flowed into the 
Arab countries. Working closely with Franz von Papen and 
Admiral Walther Wilhelm Canaris—probably the greatest or- 
ganizer of espionage and sabotage of World War II—the 
Mufti's agents relayed German intelligence daily to Nazi 
couriers along the Syrian-Turkish border. A special Parachutist 
and Sabotage School was established, and saboteurs were 
trained there for service behind Allied lines. 
The Mufti also organized an Arab Brigade and a Moslem 
Legion to fight side by side with the Nazis. An Arab leader 
accepted a commission as colonel in the Wehrmacht.2 Turn- 
2 The nature of Arab sympathies may be judged by the fact that when 
Fawzy Bey el Kawoukjy returned from Germany to the Middle East he was 420 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
ing to large Moslem populations in Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Alba- 
nia, the Mufti with the help of Pavelich, the Croatian quisling, 
recruited substantial numbers of Moslem Holy Warriors who 
fought as the Waffen SS, and the "Free Arabia" movement. 
The Mufti visited these troops frequently, praying with them, 
exhorting them to fight for Allah. 
Haj Amin also wrote to leaders in Rumania, Bulgaria, and 
Hungary urging them to speed the Jews to Poland—where it 
was known that the major Nazi  death chambers were lo- 
cated. To von Ribbentrop he complained that despite the 
Nazi declaration to destroy the "so-called Jewish national 
home," Jews were being excha nged for Palestinian Germans 
and German prisoners of war. As a consequence, all such ex- 
changes involving Jews were stopped; arrangements by the 
Jewish Agency to send 900 Hungarian children accompanied 
by 100 adults were also sabotaged. The result was that hun- 
dreds of thousands of Jews were liquidated as a "practical ex- 
ample" of friendship by "Germany towards the Arab Nation." 
According to Document NG-5461, Office of Chief of 
Counsel for War Crimes, the following enormous expendi- 
tures were made, in German marks,3 on the Arab crusade 
against the Allied cause: 
Monthly Yearly 
Mufti account: for rents, personal up- 
keep, wages, salaries (residences in 
Berlin; houses I, II, III, IV; Hotel 
Adlon; Hotel Zittau; the Jewish Insti- 
tute, Klopstockstrasse)   ..........................       66,850      802,200 
feted everywhere as a hero, and the Syrian government granted him a large 
house in Damascus. In Lebanon, his birthp lace, he lived as the summer guest 
of various Lebanese officials. The Arab  League bestowed on him the highest 
Arab military rank, that of commander of the Army of Liberation. Later, King 
Abdullah granted him the title of Pasha, highest in the Arab social lexicon. 
3 Two and a half marks were equiva lent at the time to one dollar. Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 421 
Monthly      Yearly 
In foreign currencies.................................      25,000      300,000 
Special expenses, "made once" (furni- 
ture, etc.)   ................................................ 21,100 
El Khailani account: for rents, personal 
upkeep, wages, salaries (residence in 
Berlin, Houses I, II, III, IV, and ten 
other houses)  .........................................       86,580    1,038,960 
In foreign currencies................................       30,000      360,000 
Special expenses, "made once" (furni- 
ture, etc.)  ................................................. 155,800 
Five  months  at  sea  resort  Banzin, 
"made once" ............................................ 82, 000 
Fauzi el Kaudzi4 account: for rents, 
residence in Altenberg ............................  600 7,200 
Prince Mansour Daud5 (a cousin of 
King Farouk): for rents, personal ex- 
penses ......................................................      12,750      153,000 
Kamil Mrowa account: paid "in foreign 
currency"6.................................................        2, 500 30,000 
Upkeep for miscellaneous other Arabs ..      10,300      123,600 
150 Arab students, Paris, "living ex- 
penses in foreign currency" ....................      160,000    1,920,000 
Total 4,993,860 
4 Document NG-5461 includes an explanatory note, as follows: "Fauzi 
el Kaudzi [German spelling] is the well known rebel leader from Palestine, 
who in 1941 returned from Iraq to Greece seriously wounded and was sub- 
sequently brought to German y. Fauzi el Kaudzi held the rank of colonel in 
the German Army and in addition to th e pension from Raschi d Ali el Gailani, 
he received financial support from the Wehrmacht. The support from the 
Wehrmacht was reduced in the course of the year 1944 and finally amounted 
to onlv about 30 bottles of cognac a month." 
5 According to Document NG-5461, the Prince "came to Germany in 
1943 with his wife and two children a nd attached himself to the Grand 
Mufti. Later [he] joined the Waffen-SS as an ordinary soldier." 
6 According to Document NG-5461, Mrowa was "stationed in Sofia 
[capital of Bulgaria] allegedly to liste n to the radio stations of the Middle 
East. . . . Mrowa sent his reports to Berlin daily. " 422 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
". . . ON THE SOIL OF KASHMIR OR PALESTINE" 
WITH the triumph of the Allies, the Mufti again became a 
fugitive. He reached France and was housed in a villa in the 
fashionable Paris suburb of Rambouillet. At a time when 
France hungered, the Mufti lived in luxury. The French 
winked an eye at all this, anxious not to hurt His Excellency's 
feelings because France held Morocco, Indochina, and other 
colonies with heavy Moslem populations. 
England, too, had to proceed cautiously lest it offend the 
pro-Axis Arab ruling cliques of the Middle East. Although 
morally she should have undertaken the prosecution of the 
Mufti as a war criminal, she did not ask France for his extra- 
dition. It was about this time that the Mufti's escape to Cairo 
was engineered by Marouf Dawalibi—the Mephistophelian 
Arab I had interviewed after my meeting with the Mufti. The 
French and English expressed surprise—and closed the mat- 
ter. King Farouk gave the Muf ti refuge, and Haj Amin lolled 
in luxury in Villa Aida in Alexandria as he had in Baghdad, 
Rome, Berlin, and Paris. But he was not idle. Nor was he 
without friends. 
The Arab world beat a path to his door as he received the 
good wishes of Arab leaders. From Cairo the Arab League 
cabled London: "Now that the war has ended and nothing 
remains except the desire for the return of everything to 
normal, the Arab states wish to  declare that the time is now 
ripe to let Haj Amin el Husseini, Mufti of Palestine, again 
enjoy his civil rights and be readmitted to his country." With 
Arab League help, the Mufti reorganized the Arab Higher 
Committee, appointing the same gang and the same retinue 
who had served with him on the original committee, and 
later, in Iraq. The Arab League then equipped and turned over 
to Fawzy Bey el Kawoukjy the Army of Liberation. The prodi- Das Arabische Buro: der Grossmufti 423 
gal Arab and other Arab prodigals had returned home. By 1948 
everything was back to normal, completing the circle. 
Following the debacle of Kawoukjy and the Arab League 
in the Arab-Israel War, the Mufti (still the sole, dominant 
spokesman for Palestine's "independence") continued to work 
behind the scenes. In February 1951 he suddenly reappeared in 
Karachi, Pakistan to meet ol d friends who had supported his 
cause in Iraq and to preside over a twelve-day World Moslem 
Congress. In a typical inflamma tory address, he called for a 
"full struggle" by the Moslems "to meet the aggressor"— 
meaning, in this instance, the non-Moslem Hindus of India. 
He assured the delegates: "We shall meet next with sword in 
hand on the soil of either Kashmir or Palestine." 
Following the assassination in Ju ly 1951 of King Abdullah as 
he was about to enter the Mosque  of Omar (his moderate rule 
and peaceful aims were distrusted by all Mufti followers), 
newspapers reported that the assassin was a member of the 
"demolition squad" of a Pales tinian underground group called 
Jehad Mukadess, or Sacred Struggle Organization. The organi- 
zation was said to be under the leadership of certain members 
of the Husscini family. The principal figure in the Husseini 
clan is the Mufti. 
This, then, is the story of Haj Amin el Husseini. Where 
will he strike next "with swor d in hand"? Where will he lead 
his Holy Warriors in the next Jehad? (CHAPTER XXIII) 
BEIRUT: FAREWELL TO THE ARABS 
"We don't want the Arabs with whom we are living 
to revert to Mohammed and the desert. We stand 
for democracy between Moslem and Christian." 
Lebanese Christian 
"Our goal is contained in the sentence uttered by 
King Hussein; 'The Arab countries are for the Arabs 
only.'" 
Lebanese Moslem 
BEIRUT, capital of Lebanon, the bridge between East and 
West, was sixty miles distant from Damascus. Over a road 
traversing wild, picturesque gorges and mountains, through a 
maze of hairpin curves and sweeping scenery, I arrived there 
by taxi at midday. 
After the simplicity of most Moslem cities, Beirut was con- 
fusing. It was a Babel. Arabic, French, English, Armenian, 
Turkish—in that order—were spoken everywhere. A Christian 
child often could speak three languages. Beirut was a hotbed 
of political intrigue, and a melting-pot of Christian and Mos- 
lem—for Lebanon's population was almost evenly divided be- 
tween the two. One faction in Beirut opposed Zionism. An- 
other, fearing Moslem power and loss of commerce, was 
pro-Israel. Adding to the confusion was the powerful voice of Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 425 
the Roman Catholic Maronite Church, as well as the articu- 
late and telling voice of the Armenian minority—100,000 in 
Lebanon's population of 1,250,000. A leading seaport of the 
Middle East, Beirut was the playground and free-for-all mart, 
the gateway for the Arab world and the last stronghold of the 
West, and of Christianity in the Arab Middle East. 
Into this seething caldron of intrigue—a city noted for its 
handsome men and women, cleanliness, and pro-West loyal- 
ties—I plunged after my usual few days of sight-seeing and 
orientation. I almost tripped on my first encounter when I 
was invited by an Armenian to meet "an Arab friend." I went 
eagerly to meet the short, handsome young Arab, who spoke 
impeccable English. The name, Cecil Hourani, meant nothing 
until Mr. Hourani asked sharply: 
"You wrote Under Cover and The Plotters, didn't you?" 
I looked at him blankly, and sipped my coffee in silence. 
"I remember The Plotters particularly," he went on. "You 
weren't very complimentary to the Arab Office." 
Now I recalled Hourani; he had been an official and spokes- 
man of the Arab Office in Washington. Directed from Lon- 
don, and supporting the Mufti, it served not only as a front 
for anti-Zionist propaganda but as an agency that found great 
favor with America's Jew-baiters from coast to coast. 
"Ah, yes, forget it," I managed to say without turning color. 
"I've now seen the Arab worl d. I'm tremendously impressed. 
My views have changed." 
"I'm very happy to hear it, but it remains to be seen what 
you will write." 
"I'll write the truth." I hoped the matter would end there. 
After this I decided to trust no one. I assumed that every 
Lebanese and every Armenian I met was as anti-Zionist as any 
Syrian or Egyptian. Never before had I been called upon to 
assume so many guises or to remember to keep straight so 
many political views, and variations thereof, to prevent dis- 
astrous slips of the tongue. An ever-present danger was from 
the Armenian Revolutionary Federation—my old friends, the 426 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Dashnags—whose members in Jerusalem had played so des- 
picable a role only a few months ago, who had been beating 
churchmen1 and murdering critics throughout the Middle 
East. The Dashnags had had thei r world headquarters in Ber- 
lin, but had now moved them to Beirut. If these Armenian 
cutthroats here ever discovered my presence I could be sure of 
a trouncing, if not worse. Thus I was forced to live under 
cover even among my own people. 
I wondered if Hourani would betray me. I wondered what 
Dr. Imam had done when he discovered I had taken French 
leave of Damascus. What had Farhan Bey done on discover- 
ing my absence from Amman? To be safe, I decided to move 
out of my hotel, telling the clerk that I was returning to Egypt 
by way of Syria and Jordan. To ma ke this more plausible, I told 
him to forward my mail in care of our embassy in Cairo. I 
moved in with friends, and lived  with them instead of at 
hotels where my movements could be traced. I took uncom- 
mon precautions to remain anonymous. The danger of losing 
the documented record of my findings and adventures haunted 
me as I made my rounds from one group to another—now 
Communist, now ultra-Fascist, now anti-Zionist. 
A cable from home awaited me at the embassy. It warned 
me that the identity of Charles L. Morey had been discovered 
and that American, British, and Arab nationalists were trying 
to find my whereabouts. The cable was two weeks old. I 
hoped they hadn't followed me here. 
Beirut was the home of political madmen. One whom I met 
was Antun Saadeh, fuehrer of the Syrian Social Nationalist 
Movement. Saadeh envisioned an Arab empire stretching from 
Turkey to the Red Sea, from Lebanon to Persia. This super 
pan-Arab dream dwarfed King Abdullah's British-supported 
Fertile Crescent project of adding Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon to 
his Trans-Jordan holdings. Both men were murdered later— 
victims of ambition. 
1 One of the many such victims was Archbishop Mazlumian, 78-year- 
old Primate of the Armenians in Athe ns, Greece, whose beard was shorn off 
by members of the Dashnag, followed by a beating of the aged dignitary. Beirut; Farewell to the Arabs 427 
FALANGE VS. NAJADA 
A MAN I had to meet was a tall, fiery, impressive forty- 
two-year-old Maronite Catho lic, a pharmacist named Pierre 
Gemayel, whom I interviewed in the rear of his drugstore. 
Gemayel was chief of the Lebane se Falange, which had a wide 
following among Catholic and other Christian Lebanese. I 
asked if he had any connection with Franco's Falange. He 
denied it: "We are free and independent, with no ties out- 
side Lebanon," he said. "But we believe in strong discipline. 
Our membership is divided into sections and divisions like an 
army. We drill. We wear uniforms. We encourage physical 
exercise." The Falange age limit was twenty to thirty-five years 
of age. 
"At one time we used the Olympic salute," (closely resem- 
bling the Fascist salute) Gemayel said, "but we were criticized 
and no longer use it. We want Lebanon to be absolutely in- 
dependent, like Switzerland. All over the Middle East the 
rights of Christian are being trampled. We don't want the 
Arabs with whom we are living to revert to Mohammed and 
the desert. We stand for democracy between Moslem and 
Christian." 
"Are you for Zionism or against it?" I asked. 
Gemayel compressed his lips. 
"Nothing can stop the development of the Jewish State. It 
is not invincible, but what State is? It will have a beneficial 
effect on the Arab world. It will raise the standard of living 
among all Arabs." Speaking in a more relaxed tone, he went 
on: "For an Arab to be beaten by the Jew is a terrible insult. 
Jews are a ball of fire in the Arab's belly, and the Arabs have 
indigestion from it. They are not prepared to die or to spend. 
Any lengthy effort would kill them because they have no re- 
serves of money or equipment." 
In expressing a somewhat pro-Zionist point of view, Ge- 428 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
mayel was following the official line of the Maronite Roman 
Catholic hierarchy, which saw in the support of neighboring 
Israel a buttressing of its own defense against encroachment 
of Islam and the ultimate submergence of the Christians in a 
Moslem sea. Although adhering to, and nominally subservient 
to the Vatican, the Maronite Church had often followed an 
autonomous course in matters relating to the Middle East, to 
the extent of clashing with Vatican politics. 
As the Falange represented the quasi-military coalition of 
Maronites and non-Catholic Ch ristians, Le Bloc National 
Libanaise represented the political effort for Catholic survival. 
Its leader, Emil Edde, had twice been received by the Vatican. 
A prominent layman leader of the Bloc expressed his fears 
candidly as to chances for Catholic survival. Citing detailed 
statistics, he showed that the Christian majority in Lebanon 
was dwindling alarmingly, and if unchecked would all but 
vanish. 
"Why has there been so rapid a growth of the Moslem pop- 
ulation?" I asked. 
"Under the Turks, the death rate was high, especially in 
childbirth," my informant explained. "During the French re- 
gime sanitation and health edu cation made great strides. The 
Moslems benefited most. Graduates from the American Uni- 
versity here are raising their living standards. There are also 
thousands of Moslem refugees from Palestine here. If ulti- 
mately given citizenship, they will upset the balance between 
Christian and Moslem. Moslems remain true to their faith. 
Converts are rare. Polygamy is still practiced. In addition 
there is a large emigration of Christians who are afraid of 
being marooned on a Moslem island, and are leaving for 
America. They are your gain because they represent our best 
citizens." 
He added that many of the officers of the Lebanese army 
were Christian, trained by the French. "Their heart is not in 
the war. It is a stupid adventure anyway—the stunt of the 
fanatics in power. Riad el Solh, the prime minister, belongs Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 429 
to the old Turkish school of diplomacy. Lebanon has no raw 
materials, little to export, and has been a trading nation since 
Phoenician days. The war has hurt everything. It has meant 
higher taxes. It has kept away tourists. Resorts and hotels have 
closed down. We have to support the miserable Moslem refu- 
gees who may some day rise against us. He shook his head. "If 
only we could trade again—at least with Israel. But, as you 
know, Moslem leaders of the Arab States are boycotting the 
Jewish State. 
"They are trying to hurt the Jews, but in reality they are 
bleeding their own bodies by disrupting Arab economy and 
hastening Arab collapse. Leban ese standards of living, literacy, 
health, and education are the highest in the Middle East. We 
are not an Arab nor Turkish people in origin, but basically 
Christian. We are not an Arab State, though the language we 
speak is Arabic because it was forced upon us by the sword. 
Lebanon cannot prosper in isolation, or by looking to the dry 
sands of the East. Lebanon can only prosper by turning to the 
waters of the West, and by trading with Israel. The fanatic 
Moslems cannot understand this; they cannot understand that 
there are worlds beyond Islam. They wish to reduce Lebanon 
to the level of the all-Moslem countries. 
"It is our aim to make Lebanon the Achilles heel of Arab- 
Moslem solidarity. Otherwise it means that the Christians' 
cause is doomed in the Middle East." 
A diametrically opposite point of view was that held by the 
Najada (meaning "Helpers"), le d in Beirut by Dr. Mohaddin 
Berghout, who told me: 
"The sole aim of Najada is to keep the Lebanon Arabic. 
Our goal is contained in the sentence uttered by King Hussein 
["father" of the Arab awakening]: 'The Arab countries are for 
the Arabs only.' Any stranger can  live with us in peace on the 
condition that he agrees with our social and political life, and 
does not plan to fight Arab aims in the future." 
"What is your attitude toward Israel?" I asked. 
"We don't recognize that a Jewish State exists," he said, 430 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
his black eyes blazing. "We will do everything to get rid of 
the Jewish invader. Everything for the war! Jews are like a 
foreign arrow in Arab society. We find it impossible to get 
along with them. Our morality is different. Prostitution and 
immorality were started by the Jews. Their magazines and 
books have filthy pictures in order to weaken human society 
so they can destroy it and rule  over the world." I sensed a 
familiar pattern in Dr. Berghout's views, and I did not have 
long to wait to have his source of information confirmed. 
"Bolshevism was the creation of International Judaism. The 
aim of Bolshevism was to obta in financial benefits from the 
rich. In Russia it was the Jews who began the revolution/' 
went on Dr. Berghout. "There is a fine book on this sub- 
ject . . ." 
"I know," I said, "The Protocols." 
"Exactly the book. Ohhh," the doctor sighed, "nobody in 
the West is our sincere friend. Truman is more Zionist than 
even the Jews. The English are here for their interest only. 
The French are trying to get back their influence. The only 
friends we have are in the East. Our only protection lies in 
Islam, in the unity of the Arab people." 
Like the Falange, the Najada, too, was essentially a youth 
organization. Dr. Berghout pointed out that the vice-com- 
mander of the Beirut district was "a very strong man." He 
was Khalil Mahjoub, a boxer, who invited me to the gymna- 
sium to watch him tear apart his opponents. 
I visualized Mahjoub of the Najada grappling with Gemayel 
of the Falange—Lebanese Moslem vs. Lebanese Catholic— 
and I could not help but feel that East and West would clash 
violently, and within my own lifetime. At first there would be 
a long and bitter period of ps ychological warfare between a 
coalition of the Falange-Bloc Na tional led by Maronite Cath- 
olics, and the hydra-headed Najada-type groups that would 
spring up by the score, led by the Berghouts. The outcome 
would depend largely on the support, both material and 
moral, furnished by the West, for the Maronites alone would Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 431 
be no match against the Goliath of Islam. And on the success 
or failure of the organized Maronite fight for survival would 
hinge, to a great degree, the future of all other Christian mi- 
norities in this turbulent corner of the Middle East.2 
LEBANON'S COMMUNISTS 
AFTER a week's effort I managed to corner Moustafa el 
Ariss, one of the important leaders of Lebanon's Commu- 
nists. He was president of the Typographers Syndicate and of 
the Federation of Lebanese Workers, and had been a party 
member since 1934. He was not in jail—yet—because his 
union had gone on strike when authorities attempted to im- 
prison him, indicating the iron discipline he maintained over 
his organization. Interviewing him at his headquarters, I found 
nothing subtle about El Ariss. He looked angry. A curl in his 
lip gave his face a permanen t surly and scowling quality, 
"Why were you so hard to reach?" I asked. "You are meet- 
ing me now in the open." 
"I am not trying to be mysterious," El Ariss replied. "The 
police are searching for me in order to arrest me again." 
What he had to tell me was not fresh nor new. It was true 
to the extent that poverty and misery are universal through- 
out the Middle East. 
'T know what poverty is," he said. "I have seen it among 
the people. I am their pupil. Last month thirty women went 
to Riad el Solh to say that the government flour was mixed 
with dirt, sand, and stones. El Solh said that he would eat the 
2 On April 15, 1951 Lebanon held electi ons which were relatively honest 
and free of violence (although, during th e campaign, seventee n were killed). 
The Moslem regime of Premier Riad el Solh was ousted, and forty-two Chris- 
tians—of whom twenty-three were Maroni tes—-were elected to the Parliament 
of seventy-seven members. Pierre Gemayel's Falange pl ayed a conspicuous role 
in the heartening victory. In July 1951, while on a visit to Amman, Solh was 
murdered by Moslems reported to be members of the Syrian Social Nationalist 
Movement. 432 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
bread himself. When the women offered him the bread he 
would not touch it. The women then brought in a dog, and 
the dog wouldn't touch it either. This makes the dog as smart 
as the prime minister," El Ariss said, laughing. "The Lebanese 
women do most of the protesting now," he resumed. "It's 
safer. They get beaten, but not as much as the men. 
"Our workers are against Zionism," the Communist went 
on, "because Zionism is a method of slavery. It is a form of 
Jewish imperialism." This attitude  surprised me because I was 
confident the worker in Israel was infinitely better off than 
anywhere else in the Arab worl d. Then I remembered that a 
Communist—wherever found—believes in one god only, and 
in only one workers' paradise on earth. El Ariss so hated the 
United States, whose influence he said was growing in the 
Middle East, that he would answer no important questions, 
but launched off on a party-line speech each time I sought to 
go beyond his platitudes. I finally thanked him, and left. 
FACES IN LEBANON 
A FEW days later I received a letter from Stefan Meyer in 
Damascus, saying that he was coming to Beirut and would in- 
troduce me to more German sympathizers of the Arab cause. 
While waiting, I learned that Fawzy Bey el Kawoukjy was 
vacationing at the summer home of the Lebanese minister of 
defense. When I arrived I saw several tents pitched on the 
grounds for Kawoukjy's staff and bodyguards. While I waited, 
a servant brought me coffee. 
At long last the Arab hero appeared, accompanied by half 
a dozen officers. Kawoukjy (he had just been made a pasha by 
King Abdullah) was a tall, well-padded man, with greenish 
eyes and florid face. The impression I had was that of an al- 
coholic with stained teeth dressed in an elegant sport coat, 
nervously chain-smoking. The interview was a total failure. Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 433 
Kawoukjy knew he was a beaten man whose claims of vic- 
tories had proved to be Hitler-si ze lies. He was petulant and 
uncommunicative except to boast of victories to come. When 
I asked him of his sojourn in Germany, he said: "Yallah," and 
moved off, with a final surly glance, into a waiting car. 
Learning that James Wadsworth, then our ambassador to 
Iraq, was vacationing near Beirut, I went to see him, in hopes 
of finding a clear-cut answer to a question no American official 
had been able to answer satisfactorily: "What is U. S. policy 
in the Middle East?" I had first had the lame answer in Cairo, 
then in Damascus, and later in Beirut. It was: "To keep peace 
and stability." In the garden of  a beautiful summer home over- 
looking the magnificent Lebanese mountains, Mr. Wadsworth 
provided the most honest answer: "To be perfectly truthful 
with you," he said, "we have no policy in the Middle East, 
except to go along with conditions as they develop." 
I visited our United States Information Service offices, and 
came away with the impression that this hard-working unit of 
our State Department was doing an exceptionally good job in 
Beirut in promoting good will for America—and was more 
successful here than in any other Arab country. Our best 
propaganda medium in Lebanon w as, of course, the American 
University, originally established by Protestant missionaries, 
and now the country's leading educational institution. A valu- 
able adjunct was the American Ho spital. In the field of mis- 
sionary education an American Protestant leader reported 
"considerable success" in "breaking down anti-American prej- 
udices through our schools and hospitals." It seemed to me 
that our humanitarian endeavors deserved more active support; 
they were reaching the level of the common people. I found 
that most of our agencies were ineffective when they used 
purely political appeals. 
The day before Stefan arrived I interviewed Kamil Mruwi, 
a short, energetic, impatient man with a clipped and brittle 
manner. Mruwi was editor of the Lebanese newspaper, EI 
Hayet. 434 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Now that the Jews have a State," I said, "how do you pro- 
pose to defeat it?" 
"The Jews' problems have just begun. The Arabs are a pa- 
tient people. We will not always be in a shooting war with 
the Jews but we will be in a state of war with them forever. 
The Jews can be destroyed by a boycott of their trade. Who 
will buy their products? Not America, and not England. The 
Jews can only survive through trade and export to the Arab 
countries—and Arabs will not deal with the Jews. The Jews 
will starve. War will come. Maybe not for five or ten years, 
but when it docs, the Jews will be swept into the sea like a 
tidal wave. They will disappear like Sodom and Gomorrah. 
You will see." 
Stefan arrived itching to spend the money the Mufti had 
given him. 
"How about meeting those Ge rmans you wrote me about?" 
I said, after greeting him. 
"Yallah!" 
We took a tram to the German Hospital on rue George 
Picot, managed by the Sisters of St. Charles, and sat on a 
bench outside the hospital entrance. 
"It is early," Stefan said. "Every day someone is always here 
to contact any visiting Germans and help them." 
A group of five men got off the tram and walked toward 
us. We shook hands. All were originally escapees from vari- 
ous British prisoner-of-war camp s who had fought with the 
Arabs. I was interested in their leader, Gunther Elmar von 
Hardenberg, once a major in the Wehrmacht. We were soon 
seated together at lunch while Stefan went off with the other 
Nazis. 
"If you don't find anyone at the German Hospital," he 
said, "leave a message with Sister Sienna. She handles the mail 
and messages for our association." 
"What is your association?" I asked. 
"The Association for Christian German War Refugees. 
Whenever a new German comes to Beirut I screen him per- Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 435 
sonally, then register him with the Beirut police as a friend of 
the Arab cause. The police issue an identity card and all is in 
order." 
Von Hardenberg was in his thirties, a tall, lean, handsome 
man. He showed me a photograph of himself receiving a sec- 
ond Iron Cross. "I was against Hitler, who wanted to attack 
Russia at the same time as attacking the West," he said. "We 
militarists knew Russia better th an Hitler." Von Hardenberg 
had succeeded in escaping to Rumania with a group of anti- 
Hitler Nazis and eventually was captured by the British. Sent 
to Palestine as a prisoner, he claimed he was given a free hand 
to travel among the Arab States. "We Germans have to work 
with somebody," he said. "We cannot work with the Ameri- 
cans and we do not like the Russians or French. It is possible 
to work with the English. . . ." 
I saw von Hardenberg many times. He told me of frequent 
trips that German officers were making to Beirut, and stated 
that they were finding positions in various Arab armies. These 
Germans belonged to a secret group called Deutsches Hilfsko- 
mittee for den Nahen Osten, German Aid Committee for the 
Near East, of which he was chairman, von Hardenberg told 
me. 
"Is it with the Lebanese army that the Germans are finding 
positions?" I asked. 
"No. Lebanon is not militarist." 
"Then I would say it was Egypt." 
"It is Syria," von Hardenberg answered. "There are already 
many Germans working with the Syrians as trainers and tech- 
nicians." 
THE STONE ON MY HEART 
I FELT I was finished with my investigations of Arab and 
German Nazis. There now remained the Dashnags of the 436 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
Middle East3—the stone on my heart—as terrorist as any 
Arab or Nazi gang. A small but loud voice elsewhere, they had 
become increasingly active in th e Arab world. They enjoyed 
the protection of the corrupt Lebanese regime which had 
come to power in 1947 through rigged elections and police 
terror, with Dashnag help. They were also—and this hurt me 
deeply as an American—in the good graces of certain ill- 
informed agencies of our State Department, who regarded 
this treacherous element among the Armenians as friends of 
the Allied cause. 
A hopelessly outnumbered, utterly unrepresentative, thor- 
oughly hated (though often feared because of its methods of 
"direct action") element in ev ery Armenian community except 
Beirut, the Dashnags, nonetheless, have consistently portrayed 
themselves to uninformed Americans, and others, as being sole 
representatives of and spokesmen for all Armenians every- 
where. As a matter of fact, they speak for and represent the 
dictates of a narrow political clique, dominated by a few top 
leaders, known as the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, 
popularly termed Dashnag. Investigating the Dashnags on their 
home ground in Beirut was one of the most dangerous tasks I 
undertook. 
I met General Dro Ganayan, follower of the Nazi armies, 
a notorious Dashnag officer who to ld me that he had advanced 
with the Wehrmacht in their penetration of the Caucasus 
region and had retreated with them after Stalingrad. 
I also met an Armenian Catholic priest named Father 
Gamsaragan. A short, chunky, hard man in a cassock, he sub- 
mitted me to a stiff cross-exam ination before answering ques- 
tions. "I am Dashnag," I told him, giving Actionized details 
of my alleged membership. 
"Good," he answered, "I know no other kind of Arme- 
nians. As a matter of fact, it was because of the Dashnags 
3 In mentioning the Dashnags in this chapter I am referring only to the 
Dashnag in Europe and the Middle Ea st, unless the American Dashnag is 
expressly named. Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 437 
that I got into trouble." The priest went on: "The English 
arrested me in Athens and held me in their custody for eight 
months. I was then turned over to the Greek government and 
brought to trial with seventeen others as a collaborator in 
espionage. One of the men was given the death sentence. 
Five were imprisoned for life." 
"What was your sentence, Father Gamsaragan?" 
"Ten years in prison." 
He told me that he had escaped to Beirut through a ruse, 
and that friends had "fed money" to the Greek officials. 
In Beirut members of the Dashnag had already instituted a 
program of murders and assaults to eliminate their opponents. 
They had done away with one B. Naterian while he was on 
his way to an election rally, and murdered one Tchoerekjian 
in a crowded tram. Early one morning hoodlums blocked off 
a street, halted traffic at gun point, cornered and clubbed 
A. Gharib, a schoolmaster w ho had opposed them in school 
elections. Rarely brought to trial, these hoodlums bore such 
characteristic nicknames as Bitly (lice-ridden), Vayreni (wild- 
tempered), Gabig (monkey-faced), and Boxer, a gorilla of un- 
common ferocity. 
The state of mind of many of the Dashnags was clearly 
reflected in Zohrab Jevahirjian, a photographer. "I'm a Dash- 
nag by blood," he told me. "We are not mild toward our 
enemies. When the order comes to dispose of an enemy, our 
men do not rest until the work is done." Zohrab wanted to 
come to America, and was impatient with an Armenian work- 
ing as a consular employee who had handled his application. 
Brandishing his fist, Zohrab burst out: "If he does not give 
me a visa I shall kill this Voskerichian. You can't play with a 
Dashnag. Who does he think he is—toying with me! I shall 
kill this man Voskerichian. I sha ll either come to America or 
kill this man." 
The Dashnags claimed they were merely "fighting Com- 
munism," but some of them used  this merely as an excuse to 
intimidate and murder their critics, who were largely members 438 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of the Democratic Liberal Party. Wholly opportunistic, Dash- 
nag politics have been variously pro-Nazi, pro-Russia, pro-Soviet 
Armenia,4 pro-Arab, pro-Jewish, as well as anti-Jewish, anti- 
Zionist, anti-Communist, and anti-Soviet—whichever was ex- 
pedient. At the moment the official Dashnag position is rau- 
cously anti-Communist and pro-Arab; previously, the English- 
language organ of the American  Dashnag, Hairenik Weekly 
(Hairenik meaning "Fatherland"), had commended Zionism 
editorially: "Since the fall of Palestine's independence nearly 
two thousand years ago, Jewry has become a homeless element, 
hunted by fortune, until it understood that its only salvation 
lay in its return to the moth er soil. This consciousness was 
embodied in the Zionist movement whose founders rightly 
perceived that a people cannot be happy until it has acquired 
a homeland of its own." 
During 1946-7 the Soviets urge d Armenian war refugees to 
return to their homeland. More than 100,000 from Europe 
and the Middle East responded in a mass repatriation move- 
ment—particularly those who fo r thirty years had lived in 
poverty-stricken shanty towns of unbelievable misery (not only 
in the Arab world but in Greece and Bulgaria as well), those 
who feared Moslem fanaticism, and those who were objects 
of economic discrimination. Believing, then, in Soviet prom- 
ises, they left for what they thought would be a happier land. 
Dashnags everywhere in the world lauded the repatriation 
movement and some offered to go along. Hairenik, the Arme- 
nian-language organ of the Am erican Dashnag, on October 
15, 1947, published a lengthy editorial of a typically pro-Soviet 
tone: 
Repatriation means the gatherin g-of-Armenians within the 
bosom of Mother Armenia. . . . The movement is a great 
and fruitful endeavor . . . and to that effort we all must bring 
4 Armenia has been a Soviet Repub lic since 1920, following the ousting 
of the Dashnags who in 1918 beaded an independent republic. Following a 
two-year period of Dashnag mismanagement and wars, the populace accepted 
Bolshevik rule on its prom ise of "bread and peace. " Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 439 
our full cooperation. There is strength in numbers, and to the 
extent that the number of our people is great in our fatherland, 
to that extent will increase our political weight. . . . 
There exists an Armenian American community, but we 
don't know how many years it will be able to withstand the cur- 
rent that is devouring it [the fo rces of assimilation]. Whoever 
from the Armenian American comm unity goes to Armenia, is 
saved far Armenia and its future. Fo r that reason too, as yester- 
day, today and tomorrow also, we must wholeheartedly rejoice 
when the Armenian masses are transported to Armenia. . . . 
Every Armenian who participates in the repatriation must 
know, that he is sending a soldier for the defense of Armenia, 
or he is sending there a cultivator of the mind, or skilled hands 
that have mastered the arts. And enthused with this knowl- 
edge he should give at least as much as he has given in the 
past in order to save the fatherland. 
As an Allied victory became evident, and the war drew to a 
close, the American Dashnags suddenly began the promotion 
of a vigorous campaign to compel Turkey to return to the 
Soviet Union the strategic provinces of Kars and Ardahan 
bordering on the U.S.S.R. They sent a delegation to the San 
Francisco Conference, formed  committees, and published 
memoranda to plead this "Arm enian Cause." Before the war 
ended they had initiated overtur es for unity with leftist and 
liberal Armenian elements th ey had formerly denounced as 
"Communist." Hairenik "Weekly printed articles from Sovet- 
akan Hayastan, official organ of Soviet Armenia, and from 
Information Bulletin, published by the Soviet Embassy in 
Washington, as well as from Bolshevik, printed in Moscow. 
Reprinting, in translation, articles which had appeared in 
the parent organ, Hairenik Weekly in its issue of April 26, 
1944 asserted: "All that we ask of them ['United States and 
Great Britain'] is not to side with Turkey but to support the 
Armenians when the government of Soviet Armenia, with the 440 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
support of Russia, tomorrow shall present her demands on 
Turkey." The Weekly went on, later: "The [Armenian Revo- 
lutionary] Federation looks to the Soviet Government for the 
expansion of Armenia's boundari es and is willing to make all 
possible sacrifices for the realization of that national aim." 
A year later it was still harping on the same tune: "And the 
only power on earth which has both the power and the duty 
to right this wrong is Soviet Russia. That is the reason why 
Armenians abroad look to Russi a for their salvation. ... It 
[the demand for the surrender of the now highly militarized 
Turkish provinces] is neither imperialism nor expansionism. 
It is pure, elementary justice." 
Hairenik Weekly punctuated its pro-Soviet policy in an 
editorial entitled "The American Cause And Our Stand," as 
follows: 
Some ask if the Armenian Revolutionary Federation's hith- 
erto anti-Soviet policy will not be a handicap to the labors put 
forth in this country for the defense of the Armenian cause. 
In our opinion this fact will not only do no harm but, on the 
contrary, it will prove to be va stly useful. Why? . . . Because 
the favorable word of an organization which to date has been 
anti-Soviet will have far more weight in the eyes of the Ameri- 
can and English peoples than the word of those groups whose 
words and actions to date have been shaped by the orders and 
the wishes emenating [sic] from Moscow [italics mine]. 
This line kept up for about three years. Then it changed, 
suddenly and quite mysteriously. Overnight Soviet Armenia 
became a "hell" and a "prison," and those refugees who had 
gone there were denounced as traitors. Overnight, anyone who 
criticized their organization became a "Communist" or a fel- 
low traveler. Even the historic  Armenian church was smeared 
by the Dashnag press, and its prelates viciously charged with 
taking orders from Moscow. 
Tomorrow the American Dashnags may again turn their Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 441 
coat and flirt with the Soviets, as they did from 1944 to 1947. 
That is something our State Department, reputedly flirting 
with this group, ought to keep in mind. For our State De- 
partment to do so would alienate  the vast majority of demo- 
cratic Armenians in the world—pa rticularly those in the Mid- 
dle East—who throughout World War II sided with the 
Allied cause.5 
HASHEESH! 
I FOUND that some Beirut Dashnags were gun-runners. 
Others became wealthy by growing hasheesh. Close to the 
Syrian frontier, in a wild, picturesque village called Anjar, I 
visited Garabed Keoscian, a tail, rugged man wearing a large 
kalpak of black wool. By mentioning the name of Dashnags 
I'd met in Beirut, I was cordially received. His wife, he said, 
was away. "She's Catholic, I'm not," he volunteered. "The 
priest at Antioch where I lived  wanted to convert me. I said 
no. I am Dashnag. No man can force me against my will. The 
priest refused to let me enter the church with my wife. One 
day he blocked my way, so I pulled out my gun and pointed 
it at his head. The priest ran away. I had no more trouble 
after that." 
"That taught him a lesson," I said. 
"This village is now all Dashna g," he went on. "The others 
went to Armenia." 
I spent the entire day with him, taking numerous photo- 
graphs of hasheesh—from a fistful of seeds he held in his hand 
to acre after acre of plants he was cultivating. 
5 For a more detailed history of Da shnag activities, see the author's 
article: "The Armenian Displaced Pers ons" in the Winter 1949-50 issue of 
Armenian Affairs, published by the Ar menian National Council, New York; 
also The Propaganda Battlefront for May 31, 1944, published by the Friends 
of Democracy, New York, and later reprinted in the Congressional Record 
on May 4, 1945. Other informative literature on the Dashnags has been 
issued by both organizations. 442 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
"Isn't it against the law to grow hasheesh?" 
"The land devoted to hasheesh is rationed by law. I have 
planted much more than our allotment. I do not worry. I 
have fixed matters. Many officials are themselves partners in 
hasheesh farms. This year should prove very profitable." Leba- 
non's best customer had always been Egypt, the Dashnag 
pointed out. Due to the large Christian population, among 
other reasons, consumption was not large in Lebanon itself, 
Keoscian explained. Then he added: "The government needs 
money desperately this year to pa y for the war. It has increased 
its official allotment of land for hasheesh and expects at least a 
billion Lebanese liras of revenue."6 
What a criminal way to earn money, I thought: an Arab 
government sanctioning the peddling of dope, to destroy its 
own Arab people, to debauch its own Arab youth—for the 
sake of acquiring money to be used for bloodshed. I couldn't 
think of anything more vile. W ith this I left Keoseian, the 
Dashnag dope-farmer, and return ed to Beirut, where I made 
reservations to leave by plane two days later. 
That evening I had supper with Hagop, an Armenian news- 
paperman, and told him about the hasheesh farm. 
"Have you ever tried smoking the drug?" he asked. 
"No," I said. 
"Would you like me to take you to a dive?" 
"I'm game," I said. "Let's go now. I'm leaving in a few 
days." 
"Don't be in a hurry," Hagop warned. "I don't think you'll 
become an addict taking it once, but it has different effects on 
different people. It makes some half crazy. Others become so 
sexually aroused they must have two women. Still others get 
ferociously hungry," 
"Yallah," I said, grinning. 
I had no compunctions about the experiment. I had never 
6 Keoseian came close to the actual income. The Lebanese Home Min- 
istry announced later that the production had been 77,700 pounds, and the 
revenue "more than $204,000,000 "—or about 720,000,000 liras. Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 443 
used drugs. And, after all, hasheesh was so integral a part of 
Arab life, I ought to try it once before leaving the Middle 
East. 
IN THE HASHEESH DENS 
"I WILL take you to several places, the best one first," 
Hagop said, as we left the restaurant. It was nine o'clock. 
We stopped before a decrepit building with an unlighted 
hallway. We stepped inside, walked up a short flight of stairs, 
and felt for a door handle along the wall. When we found it 
Hagop knocked. 
"Tell no one you're from America. Speak Turkish," he 
whispered. 
The door was opened by an Arab with a week's growth of 
beard, dressed in grimy black shirt and trousers. We entered 
a foyer lighted by a kerosene lamp. The Arab led the way 
through another empty room into the hasheesh "salon." Four 
dirty plaster walls, and a floor littered with sputum—dried 
and drying—struck my eye first. There were benches on each 
side, and short, squat, straw-bottom chairs. On them sat the 
addicts. All were conspicuously young, save one, who seemed 
to be in his forties but might have been much younger. One 
look at him was enough to make anyone recoil from taking 
the drug: his deeply dilated pup ils, sagging eyelids, and life- 
less flesh made him look somewhat worse than our worst 
Bowery derelict. The men, six in  all, looked at us as we en- 
tered and sat down beside them on the stools. 
"An Armenian from Persia," Hagop said of me. "He has 
had the best." 
"The best of Persia is only half as good as mine," said the 
Arab who had opened the door. 
"We will see. Let my friend try your josie," Hagop said. 
The owner went into a side room—it was the kitchen 444 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
where he prepared the special water-pipe called josie—and re- 
turned with a narrow bottle to which was attached a long 
bamboo stem. He stood in front of me, stirring the charcoal 
and the hasheesh in the form of pale-green pellets, then 
turned the bottle around so the bamboo stem came to my 
mouth. Hagop had told me that as soon as this was done, my 
role was to take the foul thing and inhale the fumes. I hesi- 
tated before taking a reed that had been used by others. 
Hagop had insisted there was no danger of infection. "Hash- 
eesh is a strong disinfectant. Germs cannot survive it," he had 
insisted. "I'll leave it to God," I said to myself and seized the 
reed, inhaling deeply. 
The hasheesh seared my throat , and burned my lungs, chok- 
ing me, I thought my eyes would pop out, so intense and 
scorching were its effects on nasal passages. I coughed vio- 
lently. Then I began to hawk and spit. My eyes watered as I 
alternately coughed and spat. Everything about hasheesh is 
violent. The proprietor stood above me, beaming, proud of 
what his concoction had done. 
"It's pure hasheesh, eh?" 
"Aal!" I said. "Aal! Excellent!" 
Still coughing and spitting, I saw the josie passed around 
to the Arab next to me (Hagop declined to take it). My 
neighbor took to the reed like a starving infant at his mother's 
breast, and sucked in the hasheesh  with a desperate craving. 
He took two, three long puffs, holding the last inhalation long 
and dreamily in his nostrils, leaning his head backward so that 
the fumes penetrated lungs, throat, and nose. Then came the 
reaction—as violent as mine. He doubled over, coughing spas- 
modically, his eyes rolling. He spit, and coughed, coughed and 
spit again and wiped the water from his eyes with the back of 
his hand. Then he settled back in his chair, tilted his head 
against the wall, closed his eyes—and dreamed. 
"Hal keif aal, your hasheesh is most excellent," I said to the 
Arab. 
The josie kept making the rounds, from man to man, each Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 445 
inhaling the fumes, each series of inhalations followed by the 
same rocking explosion. The josie came down to the derelict. 
He held on to the reed a long time, as if his life depended on 
it. He sucked at it savagely, exha led, and went back to it again 
and again. As the drug is consumed with the charcoal, it grad- 
ually loses its strength. The next Arab—a youth in his late 
teens with a cluster of pimples on his forehead—was eager to 
get at the reed while it still had a "kick." The derelict finally 
released it. 
It was my turn again to have the josie. Though more than 
half its strength had by this time become dissipated, it was 
still powerful enough for me and I reacted with even greater 
violence. After this the josie made the rounds once again, for 
Arab etiquette demanded that the pipe be shared by all pres- 
ent until the hasheesh was all consumed. 
"Fill the josie again," Hagop said to the waiting proprietor, 
then turned to me with a l ook that said: "You asked for it, 
my friend." 
The Arab went into the kitchen, humming a tune, and re- 
appeared with the pipe. I offered him the first whiff, but he 
declined, and I went through the same torture over again. My 
head reeled, my throat was af lame. The josie made the rounds. 
I kept coughing. I had had e nough for one sitting and wanted 
to leave. I motioned to Hagop. But one of our friends offered 
to treat the group. We couldn't turn it down without offend- 
ing those present. So I stayed and got a third dose of the drug 
in my nostrils, lungs, and into  my quivering body. After this 
we left. 
"How do you feel?" Hagop asked. 
"I was dizzy at first. I'm all right now." 
"Are you nauseated?" 
"No. On the contrary, I feel like eating. Let's go to another 
dive." 
"Are you sure you want to go?" 
"Yes, I want to experience the full effect it has on those 
who take it." 446 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
The second salon was much bigger—a large, rectangular- 
shaped room, with a high ceiling and dim electric lights. 
There were no benches, but several dozen stools were lined 
along the walls and in groups about the room. We sat down 
with five smokers, and ordered the josie. 
"Weak or strong?" the attendant asked. 
" 'Awi!" Ilagop said before I could speak. "Strong!" 
In the room were a half dozen  small groups of men. Smok- 
ing, coughing, and spitting went on all about me; some were 
coughing so violently they seemed to be shaken by a cataleptic 
fit. The clients here, I noted, were better dressed; the smokers, 
however, were as youthful as those I had seen earlier. Coffee 
was served: this was more like a cafe, a hasheesh den and 
coffee house in one. 
By this time the attendant arrived with the josie. I found 
it even stronger than before a nd I underwent the same ordeal, 
and the same violent convulsive seizure. The floor was filthy 
with sputum. Later, I learned,  an attendant would sprinkle 
dried earth. The next morning, when the place was empty, the 
blood-stained sputum of the tubercular would be swept along 
with the others. 
"I hope you'e had enough. Let's go," Hagop said, and once 
outside, he remarked: "How do you feel?" 
"Stimulated and hungry, very hungry." 
We went to a restaurant, and even though I had had a full 
meal a few hours ago, I ate heartily. Hagop watched me with 
interest. 
"Still don't feel sick to your stomach?" 
"How could I eat all this food if I did?" 
"Well," he said. "At least I know how the stuff affects you." 
"As a matter of fact, it's not only hunger I feel—I feel 
supercharged with strength. Here. ..." I took Hagop's hand 
and gripped it. He let out a howl of pain. 
"You've turned into a savage," he bellowed. 
I put him in a taxi. Sleep was out of question for me. I felt 
more energetic than I had ever been before. My mind was Beirut: Farewell to the Arabs 447 
keen, my senses alert. I knew, now, why the miserable fella- 
heen consumed it. Hasheesh fi rst made gods of them—then it 
enslaved and destroyed them. 
I walked on, voraciously hungry again. Everything was 
closed down now. I walked to the water's edge and splashed 
water on my face. I sat on a rock, looking into the expanse of 
the sea and the mountain slopes kissing the shore; then the 
sun gradually broke over their rim in a glorious Lebanese sun- 
rise. I remained there for a long  while. I had no idea how long 
I sat there, in a state of extraordinary well-being, content with 
myself and with the world. 
I rose and walked until I found a restaurant, and gorged 
myself. Then I went home, washed and shaved, and began 
packing. This was my last day in Beirut. Tomorrow, I would 
be in Cyprus, in transit to my birthplace, Alexandropolis, 
Greece. One final concern rema ined, and it consumed me all 
day—how to take safely out my voluminous notes and photo- 
graphs. A dozen schemes came to me, some wild. I had no 
inkling whether Dr. Imam in Damascus, Cecil Hourani in 
Beirut, Farhan Bey in Amman, Nassib Boulos in Jerusalem, 
or any of my other Arab "friends" elsewhere had put the 
Lebanese police on my trail. If so, they would catch up with 
me at the airport, a favorite dragnet for Arab police, who are 
generally too lazy to look for foreigners except at airports, 
hotels, and bars. 
I sought the advice of a number of Armenian friends, who 
knew some of the airport customs officials. That night I 
packed as my friends had instructed, and left the rest to 
them. ... I worried no longer. 
I couldn't sleep; apparently the stimulating effect of the 
hasheesh hadn't worn off yet. I had eaten six times during the 
day. I stayed up all night, and by morning was still full of 
energy. I suspected that soon some kind of reaction would 
come, but I did not worry about it. My friends took me to the 
airport and saw me through. I had no difficulty with the cus- 
toms officials. To my relief, the police did not even ask to see 448 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
me. Nevertheless, the plane couldn't start fast enough for me. 
I did not feel safe until the door closed, we taxied down the 
runway, and took off. As the magnificently beautiful land- 
scape faded from view, and the Mediterranean spread below 
us, I fell into a heavy sleep, a drugged sleep. I woke, still half 
conscious, only after the stew ardess had shaken me by the 
shoulder repeatedly. . . . Our plane was descending slowly to 
touch its wheels upon the storied soil of Cyprus. (CHAPTER XXIV) 
ISRAEL, AND GOING HOME 
For a thousand years the Armenians have dreamed 
of a sovereign, democratic homeland, to which one 
might come and go freely. . . . We, too, are a pa- 
tient people. We, too, can wait. We, too, can pray. 
We, too, can dream and hope and live in the eternal 
faith of a resurrected homeland. 
HERE, in Nicosia, capital of th e British colony of Cyprus, a 
vitally strategic military base one hundred and fifty miles off 
the Lebanese coast, I planned to leave almost immediately for 
Alexandropolis. I had lived for nearly six months as a native 
among Arabs: I felt I had an understanding of the Arab world 
given to few Americans; I wanted to move on. But plans are 
only plans, and kismet, which had intervened in my affairs 
time and again, decided to do so again. 
I went to visit the Jewish Displaced Persons camps in 
Famagusta, Cyprus's main seaport, while waiting for a plane 
to Greece. The men and women I saw were on the last lap of 
their long journey to the Promised Land, and now, in the 
British camps, suffering a more civilized form of purgatory. 
"We want only to go to Eretz Israel," they said. "We sit on 
our bags and wait our turn." 
I regretted that I had not really been in Israel. In Jerusalem 
I had been isolated (because of  the war), with no possibility 450 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
of going into the Jewish State itself. I had seen no Israeli city; 
I had not visited the kibbutzim; I had spoken only to Israelis 
in Jerusalem. Nor had I gained a true feeling of the Jewish 
State—save only the sense of indomitability of the defenders 
of Jerusalem. I did not know what Zionism was. Wandering 
about the camps now, talking to the men and women, I met a 
quiet, patient Jew, Rabbi Schreibaum, who was in charge of 
expediting emigration and placating ruffled British officialdom. 
A yearning came over me to go with these refugees to their 
new homeland. 
"I want to go to Israel," I told Rabbi Schreibaum suddenly. 
He smiled, as if no request could be a surprise to him. 
"The Hatikvah is leaving for Haifa on Thursday with a 
group of immigrants. Why don't you go along?" 
"I have no visa for Israel, and my passport is full of Arab 
stamps," I said. 
"When you get to Haifa just tell them I sent you." 
The Hatikvah grossed eight hundred tons and was formerly 
an American coast guard cutter. When it left Famagusta two 
days later, it was loaded to capacity with two hundred and 
eighty Jews and an American. They were an ill-clad, ill-fed lot 
of refugees. Many were survivors of Auschwitz who bore their 
death number tatooed above their wrists. Most were from 
southern Europe: Rumania, H ungary, and Bulgaria. I had ex- 
pected to find them elated at their homecoming. But there 
was no elation. Pain, hunger, and frustration had been their 
lot for a decade and they were benumbed. 
Among the bedraggled children a half dozen carried violin 
cases. I thought it significant th at these harassed Jews thought 
of music as well as survival; at no time during my stay among 
the Arabs had I seen anybody with a violin, or with any musi- 
cal instrument of any kind. Nor had I ever seen so many wash- 
tubs as on the Hatikvah. All that a family owned was dumped 
into the tubs, which also served as cribs, for invariably on top 
of every well-packed tub was an  infant. It was usually tended 
by its father; the mothers, exhausted, were asleep on the Israel, and Going Home 451 
double-decked cots jamming every inch of space on the decks. 
These infants were the gifts the wanderers who had been 
through the torture chambers of Europe were bringing to 
Israel. 
With them I gratefully ate the food supplied by the Ameri- 
can Joint Distribution Committee: a loaf of bread, an orange, 
and a can of sardines. Night girdled the blacked-out ship, and 
I slept with the Jews. The only incident occurred at exactly 
2.02 a.m., when the deck chair on which I was dozing crashed 
beneath my weight, after which I slept on deck like the others. 
It was quite proper, I thought, for I had been a refugee myself 
from 1914 to 1921—after which I, too, had traveled by boat to 
the Promised Land beyond the great waters. 
We landed in Haifa the next morning. 
I made my grand entry by being escorted immediately to 
the police station by an inspector who was visibly disturbed 
by a passport full of Arab stamps. The police chief, A. 
Coblenz, treated me courteously, but I had to wait for an 
hour during which a frantic search went on for someone who 
would vouch for me. Finally an Israeli was found who re- 
membered Walter Winchell's praise of Under Cover, which • 
presumably cleared me of all Arab taint. At any rate, I 
went through the formality of having a visa stamped and 
E1.500 collected. 
From that day on I saw Israel as I had seen the Arab coun- 
tries—mostly on foot, alone, dressed in native garb: Boy 
Scout shorts, khaki shirt, khaki cap. I saw Israel without the 
benefit of official guides. I wanted to draw my own conclu- 
sions. I hitch-hiked from one end of the Jewish State to the 
other. Hitch-hiking is tolerated, at best, in many countries: 
but Israel is probably the only country in the world where it 
is actually encouraged and en forced. Hiking queues formed 
at nearly every road intersection and police made sure Jewish- 
owned cars picked up riders from the queue. Only diplomatic 
autos were immune; most diplomats, however, helped because 
of the shortage of gasoline and vehicles.  I traveled hun- 452 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
dreds of miles—seeing Israel from north to south and east to 
west, without paying one penny for transportation, except 
for bus and taxi fares in Tel Aviv and Haifa. 
By the same token, my food and board were free whenever 
I stayed at the kibbutzim. I lived for a week at Kibbutz 
Daganya A, an agricultural village of about five hundred Jews 
mainly from Russia, and the old est in Israel. Adjacent to it 
was Kibbutz Afikim, an industrial village with the largest 
plywood factory in the Middle East. I visited many others. 
The collective settlements won my admiration: they are 
communal villages; all property is communally owned. No 
one has any money; no one has need for it. Luxuries and ne- 
cessities, medical care, vacations, honeymoons, entertainment, 
schooling, were all provided free, in return for eight hours' 
work a day. Members worked hard, but no one died from it. 
Murder, rape, sexual aberrati ons, robbery were unheard of. 
Divorces were rare. Health standards were extraordinarily 
high. The pleasures were simple. There was no fast night-life, 
no gambling, no liquor, no hasheesh, no prostitution. 
There was security, individual and collective, without the 
surrender of one's individual liberty. There was full freedom 
of opinion, movement, and expr ession. It seemed to me that 
there could be no higher form of society than this communal 
order of life, close to the soil, which deprived one of none 
of the conveniences of civilization or the privileges of de- 
mocracy. Had not the Bible, the Talmud, Christ Himself, 
preached this simple, humble life? The Jews were the first I 
had seen to transform it into a national institution. 
I investigated many co-operative villages in which property 
was owned individually, but the land worked by co-oper- 
atively owned equipment; wher e baking, laundry, harvesting, 
and marketing were also done co -operatively. I visited "free 
enterprise" villages where the individual owned his farm, 
worked it himself, and sold his produce independently. In 
Israel there was a place for ever y Jew, whatever his economic 
persuasion—and each respected the other. Israel, and Going Home 453 
Children were treated with such tenderness and devotion, 
particularly in the kibbutzim, that I remarked about it. "They 
are our most precious possession," I was told at the Children's 
Village maintained by the Mi zrachi. "They are the future 
Israel." 
I took hundreds of photographs. Not once was I stopped 
or questioned. In Egypt, I remembered ruefully, I had been 
arrested twice the first day I attempted to take the most harm- 
less of photographs. 
Food was scarce in Israel and expensive. Meat was precious, 
a good steak rare. The food at the kibbutzim was nutritious, 
though monotonous, and served in slovenly fashion. I could 
not forget that Israel was forced to export some of its deli- 
cious milk chocolate to Switzerland in exchange for mach- 
inery and credits. As for housing, conditions were woeful, 
but immigrants were arriving at the rate of thousands a month. 
I saw the beginnings of "Church and State" troubles, and the 
inroad of other grave problems once the unity engendered by 
a common stand against the Arabs was over. The dissensions 
were similar, it seemed to me, to those our country faced at the 
close of the Revolutionary War. I hoped that those in Israel 
would prove to be in the nature of growing pains, as were ours. 
I thought of the Arabs. How I wished Moustafa were with 
me now, so that he could return to Egypt to tell what he had 
seen: Arabs in the parliament; Arab workers receiving from 
I£l to I£2 per day, and more—or roughly the weekly wages of 
some I had seen in Egypt; Arab mothers at free Jewish clin- 
ics; Arab men and women voting side by side with Jews; Arabs 
seated together with Jews at th e coffee table; Arab children 
educated at compulsory schools; Arabs living in a democracy 
for the first time in their history. Moustafa would have agreed 
that the average Arab, even in matters of food, was far better 
off in Israel than under Arab feudalism. 
I discovered that the source of Israel's genius was similar 
to the source of American genius. The immigrants were not 
simply "Jews"—but Jews who had absorbed the culture and 454 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
talents of the countries of their birth. Each brought to Israel 
the gifts peculiar to his place of origin. The inflow of this rare 
blend of talent enriched the new republic, as our own had 
been enriched. Israel provided a cultural soil in which ideas 
germinated swiftly. This dynamic creativeness—so startlingly 
in contrast to Arab apathy—was displayed in the amazing 
number of small, everyday consumer goods manufactured in 
Israel. Tel Aviv abounded in small factories engaged in pro- 
ducing goods of all kinds. Unlike the communal kibbutzim, I 
found that free enterprise prevailed in the cities. 
SELFLESSNESS 
AS I traveled through the length and breadth of the tiny 
republic, the dominant over-all impression I gained was that 
a spirit of selflessness was present everywhere: the personal 
concern of one human being for another. The Jew, I felt, was 
here reaching an inner peace and security, which came from 
living in a land that had banished the Jewish stereotypes so 
often identified with him elsewh ere: he was as good or as bad 
as his neighbor. In contrast to a life of prejudice and perse- 
cution, in Israel he was a human being accepted by his fellow 
human beings on terms of equality. 
Here, in a country where labor had a new dignity, and 
where the Jew was not forced into limited social and eco- 
nomic spheres, he had an opportunity to express himself 
according to his abilities and his aspirations. 
I spoke with a remarkably fra nk British journalist in Tel 
Aviv, who struck at the core of the alarm that Israel had in- 
duced among some persons. He was Walter Lucas, an Eng- 
lish journalist. "The trouble with these Jew is that they are 
too earnest, too energetic," Lucas said. "I'm frightened at 
the thought that this world is a prophecy of the future." 
"Why are you frightened?" I asked. Israel, and Going Home 455 
"Because I was born lazy. I inherited my laziness. I shud- 
der at the thought of having to do things vigorously. I like 
discussing ideas. I'm old-fashioned, I admit. I'm an old man 
and a grandfather. More than that, I'm decadent—one of the 
few men who admit it. I like it. Decadence is comfortable. 
I'm horrified whenever I see these bustling females in shorts 
working in the kibbutzim," he continued. Women should be 
a decoration; they should add something to the beauty of 
life. Look at those husky women! Take them home, and you 
won't need a horse. They'll do the ploughing." 
"I've always admired you English for your gift with words/' 
I said. 
Lucas didn't hear. "This is a ne w world, so much in con- 
trast to the old it's horrifying" [that seemed to be his favorite 
word], "Thirty years ago this was a desert. Now look at it. 
It's the work of a handful of men driven by the urge to be 
creative. They have the enthus iam of Boy Scouts. I don't like 
Boy Scouts. These people are too energetic. Thank God I 
won't live to see this new order in the world. I shall be dead 
then." 
"I think you're dead now," I said, laughing. 
Lucas gave me a blank stare, too lazy, I think, to laugh or 
kick me. 
I felt that Israel had gained the enmity of the Arab world 
not because it was Jewish (the Arabs had also violently op- 
posed the Crusaders) but b ecause it was a segment of the 
West now gaining a permanent foothold in the East. Israel 
represented revolution. It represented an upheaval of a long- 
entrenched feudal order. It stirred lethargies four thousand 
years old. It made the Moslem deeply and painfully feel his 
inadequacies, his backwardness, his sloth. Israel brought awak- 
ening. It brought creation. It brought the idea of democracy 
and of political and social ferment. The thought of change 
made the Arabs, as well as those espousing the Arab cause, 
quite frantic. 
Above all, Israel's concept of  Western democracy, with its 456 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
emphasis on equality and free dom—its emancipation from 
slavery—spelled a death blow to the Arab social order whenever 
it gained a foothold among the impoverished masses. This the 
Arab privileged classes feared most of all. I recalled what 
Yusef, the Egyptian student, had told me: "Education means 
social revolution. They don't want us to think ... to ask 
questions." 
I thought Israel was in an admirable position to help the 
Arab States rehabilitate themsel ves—an aim fully in keeping 
with the Marshall Plan and our Point Four Program to aid 
backward countries, I felt that if the Arabs would give up 
their self-defeating boycott, and send their wealth of raw 
material for processing, Israel's genius for manufacture and 
invention could provide them with the thousand and one 
items—from DDT and pharmaceutical products to assembled 
farm tractors and automobiles— that they needed so desper- 
ately but could not afford because of high cost of production 
in the West. 
This partnership and program of mutual self-help would 
lighten the burden of the American taxpayer, help raise the 
standard of Arab living, promote stability, and ward off Com- 
munism. Otherwise, Marxism was sure to engulf a feudal 
order festering because of poverty, discontent, and exploita- 
tion. Because freedom, enlightenment, and progress are anti- 
dotes to Communism, Israel, I felt, was the only natural 
bulwark against it in the Middle East, and therefore deserved 
our continued support, whether in the form of loans, invest- 
ments, or the continued flow of gifts. 
"WE, TOO, CAN PRAY" 
AS I saw it, Israel was the most religious country in the 
world—if by religion we mean (not the number of formal 
places of worship) the practice of the Golden Rule. In these Israel, and Going Home 457 
terms the whole of Israel impressed me as a testament to a liv- 
ing God—a living witness to His prophecy, a thing far more of 
the spirit than of the flesh. Th e spirit was infectious, espe- 
cially to one who like myself had seen the material side: the 
Arab side. 
I viewed my tour of Israel in the light of a religious expe- 
rience. 
I left Israel believing in miracles—that God still speaks, 
that prayers are answered, th at the laws of Good and Evil 
still rule. By the same token I believe that Israel, after many 
tribulations, will survive. In the simplest of terms, Israel, as 
I saw it, represented Good: the Arab world—with the cruelty 
perpetrated upon its vast masses, and with the immorality 
and transgression of its ruling classes—represented Evil. Be- 
tween the two I had no doubt how the struggle would resolve 
itself. I believe, with the faith of a child, in the ultimate tri- 
umph of democracy not in Israel alone, but throughout the 
world. 
Israel proved, too, a sentimental homeland for me. For 
two thousand years the Jews had dreamed of independence; 
for a thousand years the Armeni ans have dreamed of a sov- 
ereign, democratic homeland, to which one might come and 
go freely. I had gained entry into almost every country, but 
where I yearned to go most, I was not permitted. No visitor 
has entered Soviet Armenia since 1947. Few have ever left it 
I thrilled vicariously at the good fortune of Israel. 
Had not the Armenians suffered under the Turks, though 
to a lesser degree, as the Jew s under Hitler? How similar the 
tortured background of these two ancient peoples, how com- 
mon their yearning for liberty. Had not Franz Werfel, an 
Austrian Jew, finding kinship with the suffering Armenians, 
also found inspiration in the struggle of the Armenians of 
Musa Dagh for survival? How natu ral, then, for one of Arme- 
nian birth to find inspiration in Israel! 
As I moved and dreamed from one end of Israel to the 
other, in my mind's eye I found myself substituting Arme- 458 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
nian for Hebrew characters in the alphabet. I saw an Arme- 
nian democracy; I read Armenian newspapers. I saw 
Armenians creatively at work, consumed with the energy of 
a liberated people. I saw Armenia being rebuilt. Yes, I 
dreamed. And I yearned with all my heart that I might be 
among my kinsmen. But then, we, too, are a patient people. 
We, too, can wait. We, too, can pray. We, too, can dream 
and hope and live in the eternal faith of a resurrected home- 
land. . . . 
TO MY BIRTHPLACE 
ON A clear, cool November day, I boarded a plane for Alex- 
andropolis. The plane rose high into white, fleecy clouds- 
all dazzling white about me. My thoughts went to the palm 
branch in my suitcase which I had carried with me every- 
where as a symbol of peace and good will. It had brought me 
neither, for the Moslem Middle East was like a doomed giant 
who in his wrath would generate even more trouble—to the 
West and to itself—more hate, mo re sin, and perpetrate more 
of his feudal rot upon his own people before he became a 
corpse cast upon the scrap heap of history. I felt that nothing 
short of revolution for liberty, such as the American revolu- 
tion of 1776, could save the Arab people. And nothing short 
of such a democratic revolution could save the Arab world 
from Communism. 
Now I was carrying the palm branch to Greece, the land 
of my birth; to Alexandropolis, the place of my birth in the 
hinterland of Greece. 
Presently I felt the plane losing altitude, and in a few min- 
utes the AEgean Sea and the Greek  archipelago with its myriad 
islands and inlets spread three thousand feet below me. I was 
in Athens, capital of Greece. I was in the West. The East Israel, and Going Home 459 
was now a memory that would painfully come to life again 
when I sat down to write of it. 
In Athens a few days later, I took a twin-engine American 
plane, and after an hour over the blue AEgean, over islands 
and lands famous in history a nd mythology, our plane circled 
above a neat little seacoast town and a few minutes later 
landed on a bumpy airstrip outside Alexandropolis. Though 
I was home at last, I knew no one here except a distant cou- 
sin whom I had never met. And thus I returned to my birth- 
place, a stranger, with no one to welcome me. 
ALEXANDROPOLIS ON THE AEGEAN 
I WENT to the best hotel in town. The proprietor said he 
hoped I would not mind the lack of heat and hot water, be- 
cause coal was scarce, and wood almost as expensive. How- 
ever, he gladly provided me with extra blankets, which turned 
out to be as thick as the mattress itself! 
I walked down to the wharves where, as a boy, I had never 
been allowed to wander alone, particularly after I had ven- 
tured a stroll along the shore during my very early stages of 
wanderlust and disappeared for a whole day. The priest had 
been hastily summoned to offer special prayers, and the sex- 
ton made to ring the mourning bell, summoning all friends 
of the family to prayer—whether for the benefit of my de- 
parted soul, or in order to help me turn up, was never clear. 
Sailors dragging the coastlin e for my body had found me 
many miles away blissfully th rowing stones into the sea. For 
a while then I was kept on a leash in the garden of our home. 
The harbor had been enlarged and a breakwater built. The 
wharves were choked: so I had always remembered them. 
Not far away used to be the banyos—separate bathing pavil- 
ions for men and women. Al exandropolis had been moder- 460 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
nized. Mixed swimming was now permitted. I walked along 
the beach, lost in memories. 
As I wandered on toward the church where I had been 
baptized, I saw the poverty that had overtaken Alexandropolis. 
The entire village of two thousand souls was shabby in appear- 
ance—in need of plaster, paint, and repairs. It had seen noth- 
ing but war and violence from the time of my birth. There 
had been the Balkan War of 1912, and World War I in 1914. 
There had been bandit raids in its wake, and then World 
War II, and the occupation by Germans and Bulgarians, who 
had always hated the Greeks. Now Markos's guerrillas were 
raiding the countryside, foraging for food and slaughtering 
the cattle. They had once reached  the outskirts of Alexan- 
dropolis but were driven back. Farmers had deserted their 
lands, and fled to the village in terror. It was the same old, 
old story. . . . 
The population had trebled. Refugees lived in tents, barns, 
and shacks, existing on the public dole and on food sent from 
America. It was estimated that  about fifteen per cent of the 
Alexandropolis population was pro-Markos, therefore pro- 
Communist. Overwhelmingly they were against the bandit 
chief and Communism. The streets were crowded with sol- 
diers in uniform, or in parts thereof, wasting their manhood 
in pursuits of war. 
I arrived at the Church of St. Garabed. Adjacent to it was 
a long barnlike building now filled with refugees. It was once 
the Armenian school. There were less than two hundred Ar- 
menians in Alexandropolis now. Every month a priest came 
from Athens for religious service s. The rectory was now rented 
to a Greek peasant whom I found repairing a rusty stovepipe. 
The plaster around the church fence had fallen, revealing the 
mud bricks and stone foundation. The foundation outside the 
wall had gone dry, the piping  removed; it was now falling 
apart. The belfry, detached fro m the church, was intact, but 
the entrance gate was forlorn an d dilapidated. I still thought 
it a lovely little village church , with a look of reverence and Israel, and Going Home 461 
humility about it, weatherbeaten and time-worn. It was 
patched all over. The red tile r oofing was cracked and broken. 
It was good to see that the two-hundred-year-old church held 
together remarkably well, considering its neglect. I began to 
feel at home. 
From a Greek refugee family living in a shack on the 
grounds, I obtained the key and en tered St. Garabed. I thought 
it beautiful inside. Within it there were no signs of neglect 
or decay. Its pews were neatly painted. The railing enclosing 
the choir was highly polished. The altarpieces were immacu- 
late. Two Bibles lay on stands covered with lace. The niche— 
where I had been baptized—was covered with an embroidered 
curtain. The painting of the Madonna and Child gracing the 
altar was radiant. It was late afternoon, and the sun's rays 
streaming in from both sides added to the beauty of the little 
church. I knelt to pray. 
I visited the hammam, or public bath; an enormously large 
stone building, with a huge central cupola, resembling a dis- 
carded fortress. It was now a refugee shelter. Moss grew on 
its walls, and grass covered the roof where the tiles were 
broken and covered with earth. The public bath was a village 
institution visited at monthly intervals by the well-to-do, and 
less frequently by poorer folk. How well I recall those ex- 
cursions with mother, carrying a picnic basket. Women 
brought lunches, and spent the entire day bathing, gossiping, 
and eating. The all-day bath had to do for an entire month. 
Boys up to seven years of age were permitted to accompany 
mothers; from then on they went with their fathers. 
I wondered if the furoun, public  oven, was still there. We 
used to take our roasts and casserole dishes here for baking. 
It also served as a bakery. I remembered it painfully, for one 
day while watching the baker shift the loaves inside the oven 
with his long flat ladle, he accidently whacked me in the eye 
and I ran home howling. Yes, the public oven was still there, 
and doing business as usual! 
I walked along King George boulevard. I could think of 462 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
nothing to justify the name, for although it was a broad tree- 
lined avenue, it offered nothing worthwhile for sale. No native 
crafts of any kind were on disp lay, and its shops were shabby. 
A young Greek looked at me, anticipating my question. "I 
have not worked for a year becau se there is no work," he said 
resignedly. "There is no commerce. The frontiers are closed 
to trade. Alexandropolis is a blind alley. It is the end of the 
world for a young man. We live only to waste away." 
King George boulevard was filled with slogans of the day: 
"Long Live the Army!" "Long Live the Navy!" The public 
letter-writer was still on the job, for many of the farmers 
continued to be illiterate. E nglish-imported bicycles were 
decorated with Greek, and si gnificantly, American flags. 
There were no Union Jacks. "The English are tricky; they 
speak with two tongues," one Greek said to me. "The Amer- 
icans speak one language." Woodcutting and broom-making 
seemed to be the main industri es. Ox-drawn carts driven by 
children rumbled in a steady stream from the countryside 
loaded with gnarled oak branch es. Most of the children I saw 
were pathetic: thin, wizened, pale, tubercular, in cast-off cloth- 
ing—peddling pretzels, selling chestnuts, working as boot- 
blacks, begging, fighting. 
In the evening I went to the Titania Cinema to see a dou- 
ble feature: Tarzan and the Leopard Woman, and an Ameri- 
can documentary film on the TVA, featuring our hydroelec- 
tric projects, farms, and machines. It stole the show. I thrilled 
to see the contrast between the might of my country and the 
run-down world in which I found myself! What a gigantic, 
powerful, dynamic industrial nation America was! The audi- 
ence gaped in amazement at wheat fields that reached to the 
horizon, at threshing machines almost half as large as Alex- 
andropolis's harbor. The audien ce consisted of soldiers and 
sailors, wearing overcoats and hats . So did I. It was cold. The 
ceiling of the theater was covered with barn-red tin stripping; 
its floor was littered with news papers, candy wrappers, pump- 
kin-seed shells. The ancient film broke at least a dozen times Israel, and Going Home 463 
while Tarzan heroically rescued sweet innocents from the 
clutches of the villainous Leopard Woman. I enjoyed it! 
As I went into my cold bed this first night, pulling the 
thick heavy blankets over me, I asked myself again and again: 
Was this my home? Was this poor little town my birthplace? 
How would I find the house in which I was born? Would it 
be shabby and dilapidated, or would it be the spacious and 
radiant place I remembered from childhood? It was once a 
showplace of the town, and it adjoined the Italian consulate, 
where visitors called in fanc y phaetons. What would it be 
like today? With these thoughts I fell into a troubled sleep. 
Next morning, as I had so often done in my boyhood 
thirty-five years ago, I climbed into the branches of a gnarled 
old oak that overlooked the harbor. The tree was many hun- 
dreds of years old. It was said that the Turkish name of the 
town—Dede-aghatch (meaning Grandfather Tree) —had 
been taken from this ancient oak. As a child it had seemed 
to me to be the largest tree in the world. Actually, the top- 
most branch now was twenty-five feet above the ground! How 
Dede-aghatch had shriveled. . . . 
I walked over to the grounds that once had housed the 
Catholic convent. Mother had boarded me here for several 
weeks while father and she, expecting their second child, had 
fled into the hills to escape ba ndits. I had difficulty locating 
the convent, for few remembered it as such. When I did find 
it, it was no longer the huge lovely building I had kept in my 
mind's eye, but a ramshackle two-story frame house with fall- 
ing plaster, and a yard filled with debris. It, too, had shriveled. 
The nuns were gone. It was now a tenement, and on one side 
was a tobacco shop with a sign in Greek reading: "Grand 
Brittany." 
During the course of the day I traced my only surviving 
relative, who turned out to be a second cousin named Arto 
Kassemian. Arto owned a general-merchandise bazaar, and I 
found him sick in bed suffering from severe rheumatism ac- 
quired during the long and bitter nights he had stood guard 464 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
in the hills around Alexandropolis  against Markos's guerrillas. 
He did not think he could ever recover without proper medi- 
cation, unavailable in the village. Could I bring him, his 
wife and children, and his sev enty-four-year-old mother to 
America? 
Through Arto I located a neighbor who remembered our 
family—Victoria Exerjian, now seventy, a gray-haired, tortured 
little widow with her right eye closed, who remembered all 
the vicissitudes that had befallen Alexandropolis. She apol- 
ogized for the condition of her home. "This was once a very 
lovely house," she said. "Only my unmarried daughter lives 
with me now. Someone—I think it was a refugee—ripped off 
the doors for firewood last week, and it gets very cold. . . . 
You ask me what happened to Alexandropolis after you left? 
What didn't happen! After you left—it was in 1915—the 
English came, then the Italians, the French, and the Greeks. 
Bulgars and Germans both used it during the war. Ahh . . . 
the Germans were cruel and mean! After World War II the 
Greek Communists took charge and ordered everyone to 
attend their parades, and salute with the clenched fist. Before 
them the Germans ordered us to see their parades and greet 
their flag with Nazi salutes. Everyone who came took what 
was left by his predecessor, and destroyed more. Can anything 
survive such a devastation?" 
"What do you recall of me as a child?" I asked her. 
She thought a moment. "I remember you as extremely 
active, always up to some kind of prank. You would ask about 
animals, then want to know why some of them had long tails 
and others short. You enjoye d going into the country with 
Christo, your nurse. I can see you now . . . passing with 
Christo in front of my house, carrying your lunch, your milk- 
goat trailing behind you. You would stay away all day. . . . 
When you visit your house," she said suddenly, "you may 
not recognize it." Israel, and Going Home 465 
HOME 
IT WAS only a block away, on 8 Soulion street, and I hur- 
ried there with quickening step s. I came to a fountain around 
the corner from our home where the boys used to fill their 
mouths with water and douse the girls. I remembered pulling 
the pigtails of a little girl one  day, not noticing her enraged 
mother sneaking up behind me. Gripping me firmly by my 
own hair all the way home, she deposited me, squealing, in 
our backyard. 
I was standing before what was once the yard in which I had 
played. It was a wreck; the iron fencing was torn off, and every- 
where were crumbling stone and rotting wood. Our beautiful 
grapevine was gone. The fig trees had disappeared. A shanty 
had been built here, with a straw roof. I looked at the house 
where a midwife had delivered me, and I could not help weep- 
ing. One side of it was whitewashed, the other a drab, peeling 
plaster. Its window frames were sagging and cracked; broken 
panes had been replaced with boards. The lower half of a 
second story window was barricaded with mud-bricks. Every- 
where the laths showed. Two narrow rusty stovepipes pro- 
truded. The balcony on which I had so often played, looking 
out on the AEgean, was now in such a dilapidated state that I 
saw a woman cross herself before stepping under it to go in- 
side the house. I heard a gobbling sound behind—a flock of 
turkeys prodded on by a peasant in a beret and rawhide slip- 
pers came down Soulion street . A lone white lamb followed 
him, its tail drooping. 
Again I asked myself: Was this my home? Stunned, I 
stepped through the iron gate, now rusty and unhinged, into 
the yard. I walked through it and entered the house by the 
back door, looking for my bedroom. It was now occupied by 
refugees who had fled Markos's bands. Four families lived in 
five rooms. The largest of these was the Dimitrios Damaski- 466 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
nidis family—husband and wife and five children. Together 
with other tenants, they used the one bathroom below, its 
door patched with newspaper. Dimitrios received some food, 
mostly from America, and 2,500 drachmas a month from the 
government—the equivalent of twenty-five cents. "What can 
we do with 2,500 drachmas?" the wife, Eleni, asked helplessly. 
"It costs us more to buy food for one day!" 
I knocked on the door of what had been my bedroom. It 
was opened by a woman dressed in black, Hariklia Yankoug- 
lou. Her husband had died a sl ave laborer in Germany, and 
she lived alone. On the floor was a cheap scatter-rug, on the 
table a pile of clothing waiting to be ironed. On the wall was 
a gas light. The curtains were rough, homemade. An iron cot 
with a soiled coverlet was in one corner. In the other stood a 
squat, pot-bellied stove, blazing with a wood fire. But it gave 
me no warmth. There was no warmth in my room, in the 
home of my birth, in my heart, in Greece, in the Arab Middle 
East, in the Old World! 
Silently I walked out of the house on 8 Soulion street. I felt 
an emptiness, a numb void between myself and the tragedy of 
Alexandropolis. I wished I could have responded favorably, 
lovingly. How does an animal—to say nothing of a human be- 
ing—respond to one who beats it, and destroys it? War had 
beaten and destroyed Alexandropolis, my home, and scattered 
my people. Destruction and misery had spoken to me. I re- 
called the year we had come to America—1921—when father 
had said: "Europe has been fighting for two thousand years. 
It may fight for another two thousand years. Let us live in 
America, the land of peace." Then I thought of my palm 
branch, the symbol of peace and good will I had brought with 
me, and I felt whipped and hopeless. 
Back at my hotel I learned that someone from the local 
police station had inquired about me. I went there, and 
faced the police captain and others gathered around him. They 
asked who I was, why I had come, what my political views 
were, why I had spent two days photographing Alexandropolis, Israel, and Going Home 467 
and what I planned to do with the photographs. Even the 
place of my birth had become victimized by the suspicions 
engendered by the madness of war! They wanted to know 
when I planned to leave. "Tomorrow," I said. "Tomorrow." 
Without seeking to do so, they had hurt me deeply. 
A detective was on hand the next day to bid me bon voyage. 
No one else came. Arto, my cousin, was bedridden; and Mrs. 
Exerjian too old and too cold to leave her home. My suitcase 
contained the only worthwhile souvenirs I could find: pebbles 
from the beach, a bit of plaster from my home; some of the 
lathwork; a jar of earth from the garden, and a few twigs from 
the Grandfather Tree. There were my only mementos. 
The plane headed toward Athens. Beyond it, America 
beckoned. I thought of how shrunken everything had ap- 
peared to my eyes: my room, which once loomed so large, was 
actually about ten feet square. How congested it all was. And 
how symbolic this was of the Old World—with all its incestu- 
ous, tragic conflicts. I thought and dreamed. I had seen the 
forces of evil at work in the part of the world from which my 
people came. I had seen misery and degradation of my fellow 
man. Against this backdrop of hopelessness, I placed the 
vitality, the hope, the dignity of my adopted land—and I was 
both proud and humble. How I thanked my parents for bring- 
ing me to America! 
Every foreign-born American, I think, should revisit his 
homeland to renew his faith in America. Every native-born 
American must, I feel, revisit the lands of his forebears to re- 
vive his faith in American demo cracy. Every tourist in Europe, 
I think, should spend some time meditating and contrasting 
ways of the Old World with those of the New. I can conceive 
of no better antidote for all the evils that beset us—Fascism 
and Communism, hate and bigotry, war and authoritarianism 
—than a true rebirth of our belief in the ways of peace and 
democracy. 
In this mood of reverie I took the plane westward, and as it 
brought me nearer and nearer the New World, I thought of 468 CAIRO TO DAMASCUS  
what America—my America—had meant to me ever since I 
had first left these s hores so many years ago. What had America 
meant to me? It had given me opportunities for growth un- 
known in the Old World. It had provided me with friends, 
infinite and staunch, impossible to cultivate in the small na- 
tionalistic islands of Europe. One could always be sure of loyal 
supporters in America, despite the enemies one made; always 
be sure of an audience despite those who sought to shout one 
down. One could always aspire to reach the top in the New 
World, because there was always  room at the top. America, 
thank God, was no blind-alley country; there was always a 
tomorrow, always a sunrise to herald a new day. The promise 
of a future was with us, always. 
My faith in my country had been strengthened and renewed 
by what I had seen from CAIRO TO DAMASCUS . Even stronger 
than before was my conviction th at in America the good out- 
weighed the bad; that evil in all its ugly forms was combated 
constantly. This knowledge ha d spurred me to do my part, 
however little, in exposing those forces dangerous to democ- 
racy, as I saw them, wherever I saw them. This had strength- 
ened my hope that, in our country at least, hate, bigotry, and 
other evils would ultimately disappear. . . . 
At the Athens airport, waiting for the plane that would take 
me home, I wandered about, still in this mood. On a bench I 
picked up a copy of the European edition of the New York 
Herald Tribune—the first Amer ican newspaper I had seen in 
weeks. I was brought sharply back to  reality. Here were disquiet- 
ing reports—reports of political conflicts, of fear and hysteria 
threatening to destroy our cheris hed freedoms, of subtle efforts 
to thrust authoritarianism upon our people on the pretext of 
fighting totalitarianism. I stood  wondering: had I not already 
seen two worlds—the East and the West—wracked by dissen- 
sion, by narrow nationalisms, by selfish interests? Was my 
country now beginning to travel the same paths? Were we—at 
a time when half the world was engulfed by tyranny—begin' Israel, and Going Home 469 
ning to darken the major beacon of faith in, and hope for, the 
future? 
These were my thoughts as I left Athens. They were with 
me again on the transatlantic pl ane that carried me westward 
again—westward to my new home  and homeland, to my birth- 
place as an American. (APPENDIX) 
ARAB-AMERICAN LIAISON NETWORK 
FOLLOWING his propaganda work in London, Yusif el Bandek 
arrived in this country in the summer of 1949. In November of 
that year he called upon Merwin K. Hart—long an admirer of 
Franco's system—carrying a lette r of introduction from Lieuten- 
ant-General Sir Frederick Morgan, who in 1946 was removed as 
chief of UNRRA in Germany after making remarks about Euro- 
pean refugees which were widely construed to be anti-Jewish. 
"General Morgan has told me I could put entire confidence in 
Bandak," Hart later explained in his National Economic Council 
Letter. "This was enough for me. Vice-Admiral Charles S. Free- 
man, U.S.N., retired, who has devoted much time to Mr. Bandak, 
and I, quickly became satisfied that Bandak was all he professed 
to be." Following this confession, Hart instituted a new series of 
anti-Semitic attacks in his Letter, of which the following, in the 
December 15, 1949, issue, is typical: 
For because of their overbearing greed and their recent and 
present willingness to involve this country in every kind of evil, 
they ["Zionist Jews"] are the number one enemy of American 
liberty and the Christian church. They are the outstanding cause 
of most of the dire troubles facing America today. . . . 
A wealth of evidence can be adduced to show that the Zionists 
have Mr. Truman's Administration in the hollow of their hand. 
The Socialist program is their program. . . . When the American 
people awaken to what they have already done and what they seek 
to do, their wrath will be truly terrible. 472 Appendix 
General Morgan had also told Hart that "Bandak had been 
sent by some 130,000 Christians of Bethlehem and vicinity [a 
wholly preposterous figure] to  appeal to the British and the 
Americans for aid." Making a great point of the fact that Bandek 
was born a Christian, Hart planned to launch Bandek into Arab- 
American liaison work by introducing him to a number of his 
friends and supporters at a secretly arranged meeting. The pro- 
jected gathering, however, was exposed by Walter Winchell and 
was never held. We next find Ba ndek's name linked with Hart's 
friend, Vice-Admiral Freeman, chairman of the Holy Land 
Christian Committee in New Yo rk, of which Bandek became 
general secretary. A group of prominent Americans were sold on 
the merits of the committee and on Mr. Bandek as a worthy rep- 
resentative. 
The list included His Grace, Ar chbishop Michael of the Greek 
Orthodox Church, Miss Virginia Gildersleeve, already on the 
board of the Institute of Arab Am erican Affairs; Dorothy Thomp- 
son, the columnist, who told a Town Hall audience that she "had 
the honor of a visit from Mr. Yusif el Bandak"; and the Reverend 
Charles T. Bridgeman, former r esidentiary canon of St. George's 
Anglican Cathedral in Jerusalem, and, at the time of this writing, 
a rector of the Wall Street Trinity Church, New York. 
Bandek became the traveling emissary of the Holy Land 
Christian Committee, ostensibly to speak and collect funds for 
Arab refugees. Actually, rather than devoting himself to helping 
Arab refugees, he gave a series of inflammatory lectures, tending 
to arouse latent anti-Semitic sympathies. With growing concern, 
the American Christian Palestin e Committee in New York, com- 
posed of Christian laymen and clergymen opposed to Hart's brand 
of bigotry and Bandek's distortion of truth, followed the trail of 
Bandek's blatant Arab propaganda from city to city. 
Here are some of the wild charges, as reported by the Reverend 
William Lindsay Young, vice-president of the National Confer- 
ence of Christians and Jews, who interviewed Bandek in Los 
Angeles: All Zionists are Communists; Arabs had never started 
the war against the Jews but fought merely to defend themselves 
against "brutal Jewish aggressors"; Communism is rampant in 
Israel; Christians have no relig ious freedom, and there are no 
Christian leaders in Israel; the Israelis killed three thousand Appendix 473 
British officers; Jews in America control "the press, the govern- 
ment, the motion pictures." 
On September 3, 1950, Bandek spoke at the First Congrega- 
tional Church in Los Angeles, of which the Reverend William F. 
Fifield—founder of Spiritual Mobilization, and a friend of 
Merwin K. Hart—is minister. Reverend Young, who was present, 
heard Bandek say that "the decision to partition Palestine was the 
result of the support to the Zionists by the Soviet Union and by 
American leaders . . . seeking not the interest of Christ, but 
votes." Reverend Young reported: "Gerald K. Smith sat in front 
of me and applauded practically  everything Mr. Bandak said. 
... I heard no discussion of ways and means to help the un- 
fortunate Christians in Bethle hem, the avowed purpose of 
Bandak's organization. There was, however, a great deal said 
about the Jew." 
Among Bandek's friends were Arab -born journalists who, like 
himself, carried on as pro-Arab propagandists. One of these was 
Levon Keshishian, an Armenian whom I met in Jerusalem in 
April, 1948, and who wrote a note of introduction to Emil Ghoury, 
a leading henchman of the Grand Mufti, recommending me as "a 
friend journalist; he is OK." Kesh ishian was imprisoned for the 
duration of the Arab-Israel war in a jail in Amman, Jordan. When 
I met him again in this country—where he is now serving as UN 
correspondent for the Arab News  Agency—Keshishian told me 
that the charges had included espionage, but that he had later 
been released without trial. On his person had been found various 
letters and checks from Jews, Armenians, and others. Amman 
officials had refused to accept his explanation of these, Keshishian 
said. "They almost hanged me," he complained. 
This man also writes regularly for Hairenik Weekly, the Boston 
publication of the Armenian Revol utionary Federation, filling its 
columns with pro-Arab stories. He has also addressed meetings of 
this organization. 
Tragic indeed must be the state of those Americans who in 
their legitimate concern for the welfare of Arab refugees allow 
themselves to be duped by appeals of distortion, falsehood, and 
bigotry inspired by Bandek, Freem an, Hart, and their like. There 
is a just case for the homeless Arabs. But neither these refugees 
nor efforts at a conciliatory settlement of their plight can be aided 474 Appendix 
by hate-mongering propaganda. Th ose well-intentioned men who 
have rallied about the Bandek-Fr eeman-Hart axis, are, unknown 
to themselves, sabotaging genuine  efforts in behalf of needy 
Arabs. 
 
 
INTERDENOMINATIONAL DISCUSSION PANEL 
Friday, October 24, 1947 
7:45 P.M. 
Church of St. Paul and St. Andrew 
263 WEST 86th STREET, at West End Avenue 
What Should Be America's Attitude Toward 
A Jewish State In Palestine? 
THE SPEAKERS WILL INCLUDE: 
Dr. Khalil Totah, a Quaker educator who served for 27 
years in Palestine. 
Canon Charles Bridgeman, of Trinity Church, who served for 
20 years under the Episcopal Bishop of Jerusalem. 
Hallam M. Richardson, Lay Leader of the Simpson Methodist Church 
will introduce the speakers and serve as moderator during the Questioning 
and Program-suggestion period. 
Leaflet advertising the appearan ce of Dr. Khalil Totah with the 
Rev. Mr. Bridgeman, committee me mber of the Holy Land Chris- 
tian Committee, with Hallam Richardson, Ahmed Hussein's coun- 
sel, listed as the moderator. 
Speaking over the Town Meeting of the Air, August 15, 1947, 
Dr. Totah declared: "The Mufti is a patriot, is a gentleman, and he 
was just as patriotic and had a right  to his opinions as Jefferson and 
Franklin had to theirs when they were fighting for American 
liberty." 